J. Mech. Phys. Solids 203 (2025) 106161 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jmps Inverse design of anisotropic microstructures using physics-augmented neural networks Asghar A. Jadoon a , Karl A. Kalina b , Manuel K. Rausch a , Reese Jones c , Jan Niklas Fuhg a ,∗ a The University of Texas at Austin, Austin TX, USA b TU Dresden, Dresden, Germany c Sandia National Laboratories, Livermore CA, USA ARTICLE INFO Keywords: Physics-augmented neural networks Inverse design Anisotropy Finite strain hyperelasticity Data-driven constitutive models ABSTRACT Composite materials often exhibit mechanical anisotropy owing to the material properties or geometrical configurations of the microstructure. This makes their inverse design a two-fold problem. First, we must learn the type and orientation of anisotropy and then find the optimal design parameters to achieve the desired mechanical response. In our work, we solve this challenge by first training a forward surrogate model based on the macroscopic stress–strain data obtained via computational homogenization for a given multiscale material. To this end, we use partially Input Convex Neural Networks (pICNNs) to obtain a representation of the strain energy in terms of the invariants of the Cauchy–Green deformation tensor which is polyconvex with respect to the deformation gradient whereas it can have an arbitrary form with respect to the design parameters. The network architecture and the strain energy function are further modified to incorporate, by construction, physics and mechanistic assumptions into the framework. While training the neural network, we find the type of anisotropy, if any, along with the preferred directions. Once the model is trained, we solve the inverse problem using an evolution strategy to obtain the design parameters that give a desired mechanical response. We test the framework against synthetic macroscale and also homogenized data. For cases where polyconvexity might be violated during the homogenization process, we present viable alternate formulations. The trained model is also integrated into a finite element framework to invert design parameters that result in a desired macroscopic response. We show that the invariant-based model is able to solve the inverse problem for a stress–strain dataset with a different preferred direction than the one it was trained on and is able to not only learn the polyconvex potentials of hyperelastic materials but also recover the correct parameters for the inverse design problem. 1. Introduction Most natural and engineered composite materials (Nguyen et al., 2007; Chen and Cheng, 1970; Mortazavian and Fatemi, 2015; Yang et al., 1998; Pinsky et al., 2005; Datta et al., 2019) exhibit anisotropy, i.e., the material exhibits a directiondependent response (Courtney, 2005; Saeb et al., 2016) which usually stems from the geometric and material properties of the microstructure. Due to the advances in additive manufacturing (AM), it is now possible to create complex, multi-material geometries ∗ Corresponding author. E-mail address: jan.fuhg@utexas.edu (J.N. Fuhg). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmps.2025.106161 Received 31 December 2024; Received in revised form 21 March 2025; Accepted 17 April 2025 Available online 30 May 2025 0022-5096/© 2025 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 203 (2025) 106161 A.A. Jadoon et al. with specific microstructures (Schumacher et al., 2015). Therefore, careful design of materials and microstructures can lead to desired macro-mechanical responses different from the source material (Surjadi et al., 2019). Computational modeling could help in improving this design process by avoiding costly tests and experiments. However, this approach faces two challenges: (i) Even if the individual materials may be isotropic, the overall response of the continuum can be anisotropic based on the microscopic geometry or the spatial distribution of these materials (Kok et al., 2018); (ii) The material response can exhibit different anisotropic characteristics (Newnham, 2005), the type and orientation of which are generally not easily deducible before material testing, even from microscopic imaging of the material (Guild and Summerscales, 1993; Trimby and Prior, 1999). In this work, we present a computational approach for the design of (hyperelastic) microstructures under varying anisotropies with targeted stress responses. Herein, we consider only two length scales — the micro- and the macro-scale (Horstemeyer, 2010; Weinan, 2011). When the length scales are well-separated and there exists no coupling between the scales, we can use homogenization methods (Schröder, 2014). The idea of homogenization is to replace the heterogeneous structure with an equivalent homogeneous one, with macroscopic properties that yield the same response as the multiscale material. The first works on homogenization of mechanical response found bounds (Voigt, 1889; Reuss, 1929; Taylor, 1938; Sachs, 1929; Hashin and Shtrikman, 1963) on effective moduli which were later extended to anisotropic composites (Milton and Kohn, 1988). However, these bounds do not take the morphology of the microstructure into account and are generally quite loose (Babuška, 1976). Assuming that there are no interactions between the inhomogeneities, Eshelby presented an equivalent inclusion method (Eshelby, 1957) where the inclusions are replaced by a single equivalent inclusion. However, the assumption of no interaction is unrealistic for materials with randomly dispersed inclusions and does not even hold for materials with a few percent volume fraction of inclusions (Zohdi and Wriggers, 2001). Nevertheless, Eshelby’s work paved the way for more rigorous analytical homogenization schemes (see e.g. Mori and Tanaka, 1973; Luo and Weng, 1987; Budiansky, 1965; Willis, 1977) that took into account the interaction between different material phases, which were also then extended to nonlinear composites and finite deformations (Hill, 1972; Ogden, 1974). In the last couple of decades, researchers have shifted their focus to computational homogenization instead (Geers et al., 2010, 2017). A main component of computational homogenization is the Representative Volume Element (RVE) which, as the name suggests, is the smallest volume element with a detailed model of the microstructure whose response is representative of the entire volume. To this end, concurrent nonlinear simulations can be used to resolve the strong coupling between a macroscopic problem and a microscopic RVE (Ghosh et al., 1996; Geers and Yvonnet, 2016). For two-scale problems, a popular approach is the FE2 method (Feyel, 1999; Raju et al., 2021), also called the coupled multiscale scheme, which transfers information on the deformation gradient and the effective stress and material tangent back-and-forth between quadrature points at the microscale and the RVE. While this approach is accurate and versatile it suffers from high computational costs (Fuhg et al., 2022b), especially in the context of inverse microstructure design. Surrogate modeling techniques have therefore been introduced that aim to learn the effective mechanical response of the RVE (Fuhg et al., 2024a) and are classified as decoupled multiscale schemes. Our work falls into this category. Historically, designing materials with targeted mechanical responses was heavily reliant on trial-and-error experimentation. Computational approaches offered a feasible alternative where material design hinged on computational simulations and optimization techniques to develop materials with required mechanical performance, significantly lowering the time and cost involved. More recently, the field has seen a shift towards an artificial intelligence (AI)-driven paradigm (Wang et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2023) where machine learning-based surrogates are employed to infer the mechanical response of materials. Since the macroscopic response of materials is dictated by the underlying microstructure, the inverse design of microstructures has been studied in the context of designing metamaterials (Zheng et al., 2023; Kumar et al., 2020; Tian et al., 2022) as well as for microstructure-dependent macroscale topology optimization (Wu et al., 2021; Vijayakumaran et al., 2024). Recent efforts in this area have also developed inverse design frameworks that comply with physical principles. This work follows a similar approach, sharing conceptual foundations with (Thakolkaran et al., 2025). However, unlike (Thakolkaran et al., 2025) which focuses on spinodoid materials, we present a framework for generic microstructures. Additionally, we incorporate the anisotropic response of the microstructure in a more interpretable manner by automated identification of the anisotropy classes and preferred directions, giving us more control over the inverse design. Moreover, we incorporate polyconvexity which, as will be explained later, ensures the existence of a minimizer in electrostatics (Ball, 1976). In this current work, we restrict ourselves to hyperelastic materials. We assume that a free energy potential can be employed to derive the mechanical response of a material and that anisotropy can be introduced through a modification of the free energy potential. This is usually done through structural tensors that can impart directional information into the free energy potential (Boehler, 1987; Itskov and Aksel, 2004). We furthermore assume that the potential is parameterized by a set of material and geometric design parameters that describe the RVE. The universal approximation capabilities of neural networks (NNs) (Hornik et al., 1989) make them a tempting choice as mapping functions to replace the free energy potential, even though other regression techniques have also been employed (Frankel et al., 2020; Fuhg and Bouklas, 2022). Through the derivatives of these neural networks, we can find the internal stresses and the tangent moduli. However, the free energy potential cannot be arbitrary and must not violate established mechanical principles (Linden et al., 2023). To this end, modified neural network architectures have been used that allow formulating potentials that respect these principles (Klein et al., 2022; Fuhg et al., 2022a; Linka and Kuhl, 2023). Further modifications to the potential itself are also usually made to ensure the existence of a stress-free state and to introduce coercivity. One of the most important constraints is the polyconvexity of the free energy function. Polyconvextiy is sufficient for quasiconvexity, which in turn guarantees rank-one convexity and thus finally guarantees that the Euler equations of the associated functional are elliptic. This can be ensured by enforcing that the potential is convex in the minors of the deformation gradient. 2 Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 203 (2025) 106161 A.A. Jadoon et al. However, the polyconvexity requirements only exist with respect to the deformation gradient while there are no general constraints with regard to RVE design parameters (Klein et al., 2023). We propose to rely on parameterized physics-augmented NNs to capture all these requirements (Klein et al., 2023). We then generate a response dataset of parameterized RVEs and leverage these flexible NNs to derive design-parameter-dependent material responses that can infer the anisotropy type and existing preferred directions during training. After the training process, the trained models can be used to solve the inverse problem of finding a microstructure (via its design variables) with a targeted material response. The paper is organized as follows. A theoretical background of (second-order) anisotropic hyperelasticity is presented in Section 2. Some constraints on the free energy potential and how they can be introduced in a neural network setting are explained in Section 3 along with a detailed framework for the forward problem. The optimization framework for solving the inverse problem is formulated in Section 4 while Section 5 focuses on data generation for both macroscale and microscale problems and presents the results for training our framework and the solutions of the inverse problems. The paper ends with concluding remarks in Section 6. 2. Theory For hyperelastic materials, we derive the mechanical properties by employing a strain (or free) energy potential 𝛹 (𝐅, ) where 𝐅 is the deformation gradient and  is a set of design variables. A more convenient representation of the free energy is in terms of the right Cauchy–Green deformation tensor 𝐂 = 𝐅𝑇 𝐅 as it ensures frame indifference since 𝐂(𝐅) = 𝐂(𝐐𝐅) for every 𝐐 ∈ Orth+ . Through thermodynamic considerations, we can define the second Piola–Kirchhoff stress as: 𝐒 = 2𝜕𝐂 𝛹 (𝐂, ) . (1) The free energy potential must satisfy the material symmetry conditions (Ogden, 1997), i.e., 𝛹 (𝐂) = 𝛹 (𝐆𝐂𝐆𝑇 , ) , (2) for every 𝐆 ∈  ⊆ Orth. To account for the symmetry group , we introduce a structure tensor, 𝐀, or a set of structure tensors,  = {𝐀𝑖 }, as additional arguments (Zhang and Rychlewski, 1990; Svendsen, 1994) to the free energy potential to get an equivalent representation: 𝛹 = 𝛹 (𝐂, , ) . (3) In this work, we only consider transversely isotropic and orthotropic anisotropies which can be represented using second-order structure tensors. Whereas, for some symmetry groups, higher-order structure tensors are needed (Kalina et al., 2024a). Setting 𝐍𝑖 = 𝐧𝑖 ⊗ 𝐧𝑖 , where 𝐧𝑖 is a unit vector, we can define a set of second-order structure tensors for the selected anisotropy groups. As ∑ in Fuhg et al. (2022a), we take  = {𝐈 = 𝑖 𝐍𝑖 } for isotropy,  = 𝐍1 for transverse isotropy and  = {𝐍1 , 𝐍2 , 𝐈} for orthotropy. Note there is no need for 𝐍3 since it is already in the span of {𝐍1 , 𝐍2 , 𝐈}. Exploiting the assumption that preferred directions of anisotropy groups under consideration must be orthogonal to each other, we can define the structural tensors through rotations of the Cartesian basis as: (4) 𝐍𝑖 (𝐑) = 𝐧𝑖 ⊗ 𝐧𝑖 = 𝐑𝐞𝑖 ⊗ 𝐑𝐞𝑖 , where 𝐧𝑖 are the orthogonal bases aligned with the preferred directions of anisotropy. We can parameterize the rotation tensor 𝐑 in terms of a unit vector 𝐩 and a rotation angle 𝜑 ∈ [0, 2𝜋] using the Rodrigues’ formula as: 𝐑(𝜑𝐩) = exp(𝜑𝐏) = 𝐈 + (sin 𝜑)𝐏 + (1 − cos 𝜑)𝐏2 , (5) where 𝐏 ≡ 𝜺𝐩 and 𝜺 is the third order permutation tensor. We ensure objectivity by expressing the potential 𝛹 in terms of invariants (Gurtin, 1982) of 𝐂 and  = {𝐀𝑖 }. A complete set of invariants can be expressed as  = {iso , trans , ortho }, with the subscripts denoting isotropic, transversely isotropic and orthotropic invariants respectively. Thus, we can write the potential as: 𝛹 = 𝛹 (𝐂, , ) = 𝛹 (, ) . (6) From this potential representation, following (Fuhg et al., 2022a), we can then write Eq. (1) in terms of a tensor bases  as: ∑ ∑ 𝐒 = 2𝜕𝐂 𝛹 = 2 𝜕𝑖 𝛹 𝜕𝐂 𝑖 = 𝑐𝑖 (, ) 𝑖 , 𝑖 (7) 𝑖 where 𝑖 ≡ 𝜕𝐂 𝑖 are a priori known for chosen invariants and 𝑐𝑖 ≡ 𝜕𝑖 𝛹 depend on the potential function itself. We define the isotropic invariants as: iso = {1 = tr(𝐂), 2 = tr(Cof𝐂), 3 = 𝐽 , 4 = −2𝐽 } , (8) √ where Cof denotes the cofactor operator and 𝐽 = det 𝐂. The first three isotropic invariants are sufficient for complete representation, but the fourth one is added to tackle an issue with (NN-based potential modeling as will be explained in the next ) section. Note that the second invariant tr(Cof𝐂) is equivalent to 12 (tr𝐂)2 − tr(𝐂2 ) . The tensor bases for isotropic invariants can then be represented as: 1 iso = {𝐈, tr(𝐂)𝐈 − 𝐂, 𝐽 𝐂−1 , −𝐽 𝐂−1 }. 2 (9) 3 Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 203 (2025) 106161 A.A. Jadoon et al. Substituting this basis into Eq. (7), we obtain the isotropic stresses as: [ ] 1 𝐒iso = 2 (𝜕𝐼1 𝛹 ) 𝐈 + (𝜕𝐼2 𝛹 ) (tr(𝐂)𝐈 − 𝐂) + (𝜕𝐼3 𝛹 ) 𝐽 𝐂−1 − (𝜕𝐼4 𝛹 ) 𝐽 𝐂−1 . (10) 2 Normally, we do not know which anisotropy class the material belongs to or what the preferred directions are. In this case, we can employ the methodology presented in Fuhg et al. (2022a) to learn the anisotropy class and preferred directions during the forward process. To this end, we introduce two parameters, 𝛼̄ 1 and 𝛼̄ 2 , which determine the degree of anisotropy. These are further placed inside the logistic function, i.e., 1 . (11) 1 + 𝑒−𝛼̄𝑖 The parameters 𝛼1 and 𝛼2 will be zero if the material is isotropic and the stresses can be represented using only the isotropic invariants. Whereas, one of them will be nonzero for the case of transverse isotropy and both will be nonzero for the orthotropic case. Since all the free energy representations contain some isotropic part, we only use these parameters for anisotropic components. Details on the learning process of these parameters during training will be presented in subsequent sections. For now, we introduce them with the anisotropic invariants. The invariant set for transversely isotropic material can be defined as: 𝛼𝑖 = trans = iso ∪ {5 = 𝛼1 tr(𝐂𝐍1 ), 6 = 𝛼1 tr((Cof𝐂)𝐍1 )} , (12) with the basis: trans = iso ∪ {𝛼1 𝐍1 , 𝛼1 [tr((Cof𝐂)𝐍1 )𝐂−1 − (Cof𝐂)𝐍1 𝐂−1 ]} . Therefore, the stress can be evaluated as: [ ] 𝐒trans = 𝐒iso + 2 (𝜕𝐼5 𝛹 ) 𝛼1 𝐍1 + (𝜕𝐼6 𝛹 ) 𝛼1 [tr((Cof𝐂)𝐍1 )𝐂−1 − (Cof𝐂)𝐍1 𝐂−1 ] . (13) (14) Finally, we can write the orthotropic invariants as: ortho = trans ∪ {7 = 𝛼2 tr(𝐂𝐍2 ), 8 = 𝛼2 tr((Cof𝐂)𝐍2 )} , (15) with the corresponding bases: ortho = trans ∪ {𝛼2 𝐍2 , 𝛼2 [tr((Cof𝐂)𝐍2 )𝐂−1 − (Cof𝐂)𝐍2 𝐂−1 ]} , leading to a stress representation of the form: [ ] 𝐒ortho = 𝐒trans + 2 (𝜕𝐼7 𝛹 ) 𝛼2 𝐍2 + (𝜕𝐼8 𝛹 ) 𝛼2 [tr((Cof𝐂)𝐍2 )𝐂−1 − (Cof𝐂)𝐍2 𝐂−1 ] . (16) (17) 3. Model construction Apart from material symmetry and frame invariance, there exist some additional constraints on the form of the free energy potential which will be discussed in the this section along with details on the enforcement of these constraints in a neural network framework. A free energy potential exhibiting ellipticity ensures material stability (Zee and Sternberg, 1983). However, enforcing this by construction in a neural network setting is a daunting task. An alternate approach is to ensure polyconvexity of the energy potential since Ball (1976) proved the existence of boundary value problem minimizers for polyconvex and coercive potentials. In addition, polyconvexity guarantees sequential weak lower semicontinuity (s.w.l.s.). Together with the coercivity it is sufficient for the existence of minimizers. Polyconvexity is generally a stronger condition than ellipticity (Alibert and Dacorogna, 1992; Aubert, 1987) but is simpler to enforce. The polyconvexity condition is fulfilled if and only if a function  exists such that 𝛹 (𝐅, , ) = (𝐅, Cof 𝐅, det 𝐅, , ) (18) where  is convex with regard to the minors of 𝐅, i.e., 𝐅, Cof 𝐅, and det 𝐅, which govern the deformation of line, area, and volume elements, respectively. Since we employ an invariant formulation, the invariants must be convex with respect to these arguments and thereby, be polyconvex in 𝐅. Although all the invariants in  fulfill this requirement, this places an additional constraint on the form of strain energy. Specifically, the strain energy must be convex and monotonically nondecreasing with respect to these invariants in order to preserve polyconvexity (Boyd and Vandenberghe, 2004). We want to model the free energy potential using a neural network such that 𝛹 (, ) = 𝛹  (, ) but it is evident that the direct application of a classical feedforward neural network does not provide a polyconvex potential. In a recent work (Amos et al., 2017), two neural network architectures were proposed: First, fully Input Convex Neural Networks (fICNNs) were presented that gave a convex scalar-valued output with respect to all the inputs. Second, partially Input Convex Neural Networks (pICNNs) which can be convex with respect to some inputs and can take arbitrary forms with regard to others. The latter is particularly useful for our problem since our strain energy potentials generally are also dependent on the design variables . We can formally write the update of these pICNNs as: ( ) 𝐲ℎ+1 = 𝛩𝑎 𝑊ℎ[𝑦𝑦] 𝐲ℎ + 𝐛[𝑦] , ℎ = 0, … , 𝐻 (19a) ℎ ( ) 𝐱ℎ+1 = 𝛩𝑐 𝑊ℎ[𝑥𝑥] 𝐱ℎ + 𝑊ℎ[𝑥𝑥0] 𝐱0 + 𝑊ℎ[𝑥𝑦] 𝐲ℎ+1 + 𝐛[𝑥] , ℎ = 0, … , 𝐻 (19b) ℎ 4 Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 203 (2025) 106161 A.A. Jadoon et al. Fig. 1. Implementation schematic for partially input convex neural network employed. This network is convex and monotonically nondecreasing in 𝑥0 which would be the invariants in our framework whereas it can take an arbitrary form with respect to 𝑦0 which represent the design variables in our framework. Here, 𝛩𝑐 represents a positive, monotonically nondecreasing, and convex activation function whereas 𝛩𝑎 represents an arbitrary activation function. The red color indicates the weights constrained to be positive to ensure convexity and monotonicity with respect to inputs 𝑥0 . This neural network is convex with respect to the inputs 𝐱0 given 𝑊ℎ[𝑥𝑥] is non-negative for ℎ = 1, … , 𝐻 and 𝛩𝑐 is a convex, monotonically non-decreasing function. And the output can take any form with respect to the inputs 𝐲0 . For our hyperelastic potential formulation, 𝐱0 corresponds to the invariants  of the Cauchy–Green deformation tensor whereas 𝐲0 corresponds to the material or design parameters . We are free to choose 𝛩𝑎 with the subscript ‘‘𝑎’’ denoting the arbitrary nature of this activation function. We can also constrain this network to be convex and monotonically increasing by ensuring 𝑊ℎ[𝑥𝑥] is non-negative for ℎ = 0, … , 𝐻 and 𝛩𝑐 is a positive, convex, and monotonically non-decreasing function (Klein et al., 2022). Unless otherwise stated, we use the following activation functions for all the problems presented in this work: 1 . (20) 1 + exp(−𝑥) This choice of activation functions satisfies the constraints. The bias vector 𝐛[𝑥] can take on any value and contributes substantially to the representation power of the network. Unfortunately, the same cannot be said about the so-called passthrough layers for the inputs 𝐱0 . As pointed out in Klein et al. (2023), the (additional) positivity constraint on the weights in the first layer curbs their benefit. Therefore, we employ a slightly modified version of pICNNs. The implementation schematic of our architecture is illustrated in Fig. 1. With the same constraints as before, we can formally write the modified pICNN as: ( ) 𝐲ℎ+1 = 𝛩𝑎 𝑊ℎ[𝑦𝑦] 𝐲ℎ + 𝐛[𝑦] , ℎ = 0, … , 𝐻 (21a) ℎ ( ) [𝑥𝑦] [𝑥𝑥] [𝑥] 𝐱ℎ+1 = 𝛩𝑐 𝑊ℎ 𝐱ℎ + 𝑊ℎ 𝐲ℎ+1 + 𝐛ℎ , ℎ = 0, … , 𝐻 (21b) 𝛩𝑐 (𝑥) = log(1 + exp(𝑥)) , 𝛩𝑎 (𝑥) = The reason behind the introduction of the fourth isotropic invariant now becomes apparent. Since we have a convex, but more importantly, monotonically increasing neural network, all the 𝜕𝑖 𝛹 terms in Eq. (10) will be positive. Furthermore, the first three bases would also be positive, at least the diagonal terms. Therefore, in order to represent negative stresses, we need to include the additional invariant (Klein et al., 2022; Linden et al., 2023). A further constraint (Kružík and Roubíček, 2019) on the potential is that it should be coercive, i.e., 𝛹 → ∞ if 𝐽 → 0 or (22) 𝐽 →∞ This is also referred to in the literature as the volumetric growth condition. It also stems from the physical consideration that the volume of an object cannot vanish or grow to infinity (Holzapfel, 2002). As argued in Klein et al. (2022), this constraint is rather theoretical in nature since most materials do not experience loading that touch on the coercivity conditions. However, to keep our framework general, we additively modify our potential to have: 𝛹 (, ) = 𝛹  (, ) + 𝛹 gr (𝐽 ) (23) where (⋅)gr indicates growth. We introduce a slightly modified form of the polyconvex term presented in Hartmann and Neff (2003) to define a coercive form: ( )2 1 (24) 𝛹 gr = 𝛾 𝐽 + − 2 . 𝐽 The additional term 𝛾 is problem-specific and can be used to control the magnitude of the stresses resulting from this term. This becomes apparent when we write out the stress contribution from 𝛹 gr , i.e., ) ( )( 1 1 𝐒gr = 2𝜕𝐂 𝛹 gr = 2𝛾 𝐽 + − 2 1− 𝐽 𝐂−1 . (25) 𝐽 𝐽2 The free energy of the system must be zero at the undeformed configuration. Therefore, we add a constant term to our potential such that it becomes: 𝛹 = 𝛹  + 𝛹 gr + 𝛹 n , (26) where (⋅)n denotes normalization. We define it as: ̄ ), 𝛹 n = −𝛹  (, (27) 5 Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 203 (2025) 106161 A.A. Jadoon et al. where ̄ denotes the invariants evaluated in the undeformed configuration. In particular, the invariants read ̄iso = {3, 3, 1, −2}, (28a) ̄trans = ̄iso ∪ {𝛼1 tr𝐍1 , 𝛼1 tr𝐍1 }, (28b) ̄ortho = ̄trans ∪ {𝛼2 tr𝐍2 , 𝛼2 tr𝐍2 }, (28c) with the following basis tensors: 1 ̄ iso = {𝐈, 2𝐈, 𝐈, −𝐈}, 2 ̄ trans = ̄ iso ∪ {𝛼1 𝐍1 , 𝛼1 tr(𝐍1 )𝐈 − 𝛼1 𝐍1 }, (29b) ̄ ortho = ̄ trans ∪ {𝛼2 𝐍2 , 𝛼2 tr(𝐍2 )𝐈 − 𝛼2 𝐍2 }, (29c) (29a) where tr𝐍1 = tr𝐍2 = 1 in our framework since it is composed of an outer product of unit vectors. In addition to the free energy being zero at the undeformed state, we also require the stresses to be zero. To this end, we further modify the free energy as: 𝛹 = 𝛹  + 𝛹 gr + 𝛹 n + 𝛹 sn (30) where 𝛹 sn denotes the free energy associated with the stress normalization and is defined as: 𝛹 sn = −o(3 − ̄3 ) + p(5 − ̄5 ) + q(6 − ̄6 ) + r(7 − ̄7 ) + s(8 − ̄8 ), (31) where, [ ] 1 o = 2 𝜕𝐼̄1 𝛹 + 2𝜕𝐼̄2 𝛹 + 𝜕𝐼̄3 𝛹 − 𝜕𝐼̄4 𝛹 + (p + q)tr(𝛼1 𝐍1 ) + (r + s)tr(𝛼2 𝐍2 ) 2 p = 𝜕𝐼̄6 𝛹 , q = 𝜕𝐼̄5 𝛹 , r = 𝜕𝐼̄8 𝛹 , s = 𝜕𝐼̄7 𝛹 Such a form for 𝛹 sn preserves polyconvexity of the free energy while ensuring a stress-free configuration at the undeformed state. Since it is a linear equation in 3 , i.e., 𝐽 , terms with o do not appear in the hessian and therefore can have the negative sign with them. Whereas all the other terms involve polyconvex invariants multiplied with some positive constants since we have a monotonically increasing neural network and therefore preserve polyconvexity of the free energy. A detailed derivation for stress normalization part of the free energy is presented in Appendix A. The applied stress normalization technique is close to the one proposed in Linden et al. (2023). However, we use a slightly different approach to normalize the anisotropic part. 4. Optimization problem Data generation will be discussed in detail in the next section but for all problems, our datasets basically contain the right Cauchy–Green deformation tensors and the stresses associated with them, along with some design variables. The training dataset denoted with the superscript † has the form {𝐒† , 𝐂† , † } where we know the associated design variables † . Whereas the target dataset has the form { ⋆ , ⋅⋆ , ⋆ } where  ⋆ denotes the target response which could be e.g. specified stresses, displacements, etc., ⋅⋆ represents all the other inputs for the target dataset and ⋆ are the (unknown) target design variables. The optimization problem can be written as: arg min ‖ ⋆ − ̂ ⋆ (⋅⋆ , ⋆ )‖2 2 ⋆ (32) † s.t. arg min ‖𝐒 − 𝐒̂ † ( † , † )‖22 𝜽 where 𝜽 is a set of the neural network parameters (weights and biases). Instead of having to solve this joint optimization problem, we solve it sequentially: We first find 𝜽 that minimizes the loss for predicted and true training stresses. We call this the forward problem. Here, we only consider the stresses during the minimization. However, other works (Vlassis et al., 2020; Vlassis and Sun, 2021) have also explored the effects of including the potential itself and/or second-order derivatives of the network during minimization. Once we have the trained neural network, we solve the inverse problem where we find the design variables ⋆ that minimize the loss between true  ⋆ and predicted target response ̂ ⋆ . First, we discuss the simple scenario where we already know the anisotropy class and the preferred directions, if any. In such cases, the forward problem reduces to training the pICNN with the respective invariant sets to get the correct free energy potential whose derivatives, when substituted into Eqs. (10), (14) or (17), give the stresses. A graphical depiction of the pICNN-based framework for obtaining the stresses is presented in Fig. 2. In this setting, the loss function looks like: 𝐿 = ‖𝐒† − 𝐒̂ † ‖22 , (33) where 𝐒 are the predicted stresses and 𝐒̂ are the true or actual stresses. As pointed out earlier, we generally do not know the anisotropy class and preferred directions. This is where the parameters 𝛼1 and 𝛼2 come in. We modify the loss function to drive these parameters to zero using 𝐿𝑝 regularization unless it is impossible to represent the free energy (or the stresses) without them being nonzero. This forces the network to discern the anisotropic components, i.e. whether the response is isotropic, transversely isotropic or orthotropic. We note that it is only necessary to sparsify the anisotropic components since we assume that an isotropic 6 Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 203 (2025) 106161 A.A. Jadoon et al. Fig. 2. Physics-augmented neural network model for the solution of the forward problem. character is always needed to represent the response function of interest, see also (Fuhg et al., 2022a). In case both 𝛼1 and 𝛼2 tend to zero we have identified an isotropic response. If the response is transversely isotropic either 𝛼1 or 𝛼2 needs to be nonzero, indicating one preferred direction. For an orthotropic response, both 𝛼1 and 𝛼2 are nonzero. We write the loss function as: 𝐿 = ‖𝐒† − 𝐒̂ † ‖22 + 𝜀‖𝜶‖𝑝𝑝 , with ( )1 ‖𝜶‖𝑝 = 𝛼1𝑝 + 𝛼2𝑝 𝑝 . (34) Here, we choose 𝑝 = 14 (Flaschel et al., 2021), and 𝜀 is the penalty parameter which needs to be tuned for a given problem. Since we do not know the preferred directions, we parameterize the tensors 𝐍1 and 𝐍2 in terms of the rotation tensor 𝐑 using Eq. (4). We can further parameterize 𝐑 through the Rodrigues’ formula from Eq. (5) such that we have four trainable parameters: the angle 𝜑 and three components of the unit vector 𝐩. Our pICNN architecture had 3 layers with 30 neurons for the layers associated with inputs  and 40 neurons for inputs  requiring convexity and monotonicity. We implemented this architecture in PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019) and used the Adam optimizer (Kingma and Ba, 2014) to optimize the neural network parameters over 5 × 105 epochs. All datasets were input in a single batch to the network with a learning rate of 10−3 . Since the network was able to learn efficiently with a single batch of data, batching was not considered. Once we have trained our pICNN, we can recover the preferred directions. The trained network gives us the parameters 𝜑 and 𝐩, which when plugged into Eqs. (4) and (5) give the structure tensors 𝐍𝑖 . We then employ the Nelder–Mead (Nelder and Mead, 1965; Gao and Han, 2012) optimization algorithm to find the unit vectors 𝐧𝑖 that give the same corresponding structure tensor 𝐍𝑖 as the one predicted by the network. Finally, we can solve the inverse design problem where we are given a set of inputs, and we want to find the design parameters that give the targeted mechanical response. To this end, we employ Covariant Matrix Adaptation Evolutionary Strategy (CMA-ES) (Hansen et al., 2003; Hansen, 2016) since it is less prone to getting stuck in local minima. It is a derivative-free evolutionary strategy that works by updating the mean and covariance matrix of a multivariate distribution based on the fitness of the previous generation to generate a new offspring. Since our framework employs invariant formulation and satisfies the material frame indifference and objectivity requirements by construction, we can write: ̄ ̄ 𝑖 ) 𝛹 = 𝛹 (𝐂, 𝑖 ) = 𝛹 (𝐂, (35) where ̄ = 𝐐𝑇 𝐂𝐐, 𝐂 ̄ 𝑖 = 𝐐𝑇 𝑖 𝐐 ∀𝐐 ∈ Orth+ , (36) 7 Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 203 (2025) 106161 A.A. Jadoon et al. Fig. 3. Results for data with known class and preferred direction from the isotropic macroscale material model (a) Training loss over epochs, (b) true (solid lines) and predicted stresses (dashed lines) over 𝐹11 on material parameters seen during training and (c) true (dashed lines) and predicted parameters (solid lines with markers) over optimization iterations. and the stresses read: 𝐒̄ = 2𝜕𝐂̄ 𝛹 (37) This allows us also to invert the preferred direction which may be different from the one our model was trained on. We can do so by once again employing the Rodrigues’ formula from Eq. (5) to get 𝜑 and three components of the unit vector 𝐩 as additional design variables in our optimization framework which can then be inverted again to get the preferred direction of anisotropy for some stress-deformation data with different material parameters and preferred direction than the ones seen by the model during training. 5. Results To test our framework, we first consider synthetic data obtained on the macroscale with the (an)isotropy class and preferred directions, if any, known beforehand. The second case also deals with macroscopic data, but with unknown anisotropy class and orientation, both of which are learned during the forward process. Then, we move on to the microscopic data, starting off with the RVE with a single spherical inclusion before presenting the results for the RVE with unidirectional fibers. The inverse problem in all these cases is to find a set of design variables ⋆ that result in a targeted stress response, i.e.,  ⋆ = 𝐒⋆ (𝐂⋆ , ⋆ ). Lastly, we embed the RVE with unidirectional fibers inside a beam implicitly, i.e., we follow the decoupled multiscale scheme approach and employ our framework within a finite element solver to solve an inverse problem that would give us design variables ⋆ that lead to targeted maximum von Mises stress 𝜎VMmax over all elements. Therefore, in this case,  ⋆ = 𝜎VMmax (⋆ ). 5.1. Macroscale data For our macroscale problems, we sample for simplicity from the deformation gradient space bounded by 𝛥 around the undeformed configuration (𝐅 = 𝐈), i.e., 𝐹𝑖𝑗 ∈ 𝛿𝑖𝑗 ∈ [−𝛥, 𝛥] with 𝛥 > 0. Despite the likelihood of generating negative stretches with this scheme, 8 Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 203 (2025) 106161 A.A. Jadoon et al. Fig. 4. Results for the data with known class and preferred direction from the transversely isotropic macroscale material model (a) Training loss over epochs, (b) true (solid lines) and predicted stresses (dashed lines) over 𝐹11 on material parameters seen during training, (c) true (dashed lines) and predicted parameters (solid lines with markers) over optimization iterations and (d) the inverted preferred direction. all samples are valid since we only use 𝐂 = 𝐅𝑇 𝐅 in the generative model evaluations. We use Latin Hypercube Sampling (Stein, 1987) to generate 𝑁𝐹 (𝑁𝐹 = 500) space-filling samples in this nine-dimensional bounded space with 𝛥 = 0.2. Appendix C contains a concise study on the effect of the number of deformation gradient samples. Both isotropic and anisotropic representations of the free energies are presented now, along with the resulting second Piola–Kirchhoff stresses. Isotropic hyperelasticity. To model compressible isotropy, we employ the well-known neo-Hookean model described by a strain energy function discussed in Refs. (Ciarlet, 1988; Bonet and Burton, 1998): 1 1 𝑐 (𝐼 − 3) − 𝑐1 log 𝐽 + 𝑐2 (𝐽 − 1)2 , 2 1 1 2 which yields a second Piola–Kirchhoff stress of the form: (38) 𝛹= 𝐒 = 𝑐1 (𝐈 − 𝐂−1 ) + 𝑐2 𝐽 (𝐽 − 1)𝐂−1 . (39) √ √ Herein 𝐼1 = tr𝐂 and 𝐽 ≡ det 𝐂 = 𝐼3 . Five samples for the material parameters 𝑐1 and 𝑐2 are chosen uniformly from the range [1.0, 5.0] and we have a dataset of the form {𝑐1𝑖 , 𝑐2𝑗 , 𝐂𝑘 , 𝐒𝑘 } with 𝑖 = 1, … , 5, 𝑗 = 1, … , 5 and 𝑘 = 1, … , 𝑁𝐹 . Hence, for all the combinations of these inputs, we get 5 × 5 × 𝑁𝐹 sets of input data. Anisotropic hyperelasticity. For materials belonging to anisotropic classes, namely transverse isotropy and orthotropy, we use a modified version of the strain energy function proposed in Holzapfel et al. (2000) which reads ( ) 𝑐 𝛹 = 𝑐1 (𝐼1 − 3) + 1 (𝐽 −2𝑐2 − 1) + 𝑐3 exp(𝑐4 (𝐼4 − 1)4 ) + exp(𝑐5 (𝐼6 − 1)4 ) − 2 , (40) 𝑐2 where 𝐼4 ≡ tr𝐂𝐍1 and 𝐼6 ≡ tr𝐂𝐍2 , giving the second Piola–Kirchhoff stress as −𝑐 𝐒 = 2𝑐1 𝐈 − 2𝑐1 𝐼3 2 𝐂−1 + 8𝑐3 𝑐4 (𝐼4 − 1)3 exp(𝑐4 (𝐼4 − 1)4 )𝐍1 (41) + 8𝑐3 𝑐5 (𝐼6 − 1)3 exp(𝑐5 (𝐼6 − 1)4 )𝐍2 . 9 Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 203 (2025) 106161 A.A. Jadoon et al. Fig. 5. Results for the data with known class and preferred direction from the orthotropic macroscale material model of (a) Training loss over epochs, (b) true (solid lines) and predicted stresses (dashed lines) over 𝐹11 on material parameters seen during training and (c) true (dashed lines) and predicted parameters (solid lines with markers) over optimization iterations. We can toggle between anisotropy classes from this strain energy function since 𝑐4 ≠ 0 and 𝑐5 = 0 gives a transversely isotropic behavior while 𝑐4 ≠ 0 and 𝑐5 ≠ 0 results in orthotropic material behavior. In our case, we set 𝑐2 = 0.75 and 𝑐3 = 1 and solve the inverse problem for the remaining parameters. We again get five samples for each parameter choosing uniformly for 𝑐1 from [1.0, 5.0], 𝑐4 from [3.0, 7.0] and 𝑐5 from [2.0, 6.0]. For the transversely isotropic case, we get the dataset {𝑐1𝑖 , 𝑐4𝑗 , 𝐂𝑘 , 𝐒𝑘 } with 𝑖 = 1, … , 5, 𝑗 = 1, … , 5 and 𝑘 = 1, … , 𝑁𝐹 whereas for orthotropic case, we have {𝑐1𝑖 , 𝑐4𝑗 , 𝑐5𝑘 , 𝐂𝑙 , 𝐒𝑙 } with 𝑖 = 1, … , 5, 𝑗 = 1, … , 5, 𝑘 = 1, … , 5 and √ √ 𝑙 = 1, … , 𝑁𝐹 . We choose the preferred directions: 𝒏1 = ( √1 , √2 , 0) and 𝒏2 = ( √2 , − √1 , 0). 3 3 3 10 3 Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 203 (2025) 106161 A.A. Jadoon et al. Fig. 6. Results for data with unknown class and preferred direction from the isotropic macroscale material model (a) Training loss over epochs, (b) Evolution of the anisotropic coefficients, (c) true (solid lines) and predicted stresses (dashed lines) over 𝐹11 on material parameters seen during training and (d) true (dashed lines) and predicted parameters (solid lines with markers) over optimization iterations. For the macroscopic data, we first consider the simple case where we assume to know a priori the anisotropy class and orientation. Fig. 3 contains the results for an isotropic model, with Fig. 3(a) showing the evolution of the loss function during training of the forward problem. Fig. 3(b) shows the uniaxial stress response of the trained model along with the true response. The vertical dashed line shows the bounds set for 𝛥 when sampling the deformation gradients for generating the training dataset. We evaluate the trained model’s performance under uniaxial tension which was not explicitly included in the training dataset. Furthermore, we set 𝐅11 = 1.3 i.e. 𝛥 = 0.3 to assess the model’s performance on extrapolated deformation gradients. It can be seen that the model performs well outside of the training data as well. This confirms the ability of the trained model to generalize to unseen or extrapolated strain states. Fig. 3(c) shows the results for the inverse problem for this specific material model. Dashed lines show the true design parameters, which were not seen by the network during the training process. Figs. 4 and 5 show the same for transversely isotropic and orthotropic datasets respectively. However, in this case, the stress–strain tuples for the inverse problem are generated with different preferred directions than the ones model was trained on, i.e., 𝒏1 = ( √1 , √1 , 0), 𝒏2 = ( √1 , − √1 , 0). Figs. 4(c) and 4(d) show 2 2 2 2 respectively the inverted material parameters and the preferred direction for the transversely isotropic case whereas Figs. 5(c) and 5(d) show the inverted preferred directions for the orthotropic dataset while the inverted material parameters are shown in Fig. 5(e). Both the forward and inverse problems give satisfactory results. We then move on to the next case where we do not know the anisotropy class and the preferred direction and want to find them during the forward process. The same dataset with different preferred directions than those used in training was utilized for the inverse problems. Fig. 6 shows the results obtained for this case with the model trained on isotropic data. It can be seen in Fig. 6(b) that both the anisotropic coefficients go to zero, signifying isotropy. Figs. 6(c) and 6(d) show the uniaxial stress fit and the inverted design parameters respectively. The results for the transversely isotropic dataset are presented in Fig. 7. The sub Fig. 7(b) shows the evolution of anisotropic coefficients. It can be seen that one of them goes to zero and the other is close to 1, implying a transversely isotropic behavior as expected. Fig. 7(d) shows the preferred direction recovered from the network parameters 𝐩 and 𝜑 for the training dataset. The solution of the inverse problem is shown in Fig. 7(e) and we see that the model is able to accurately predict the design parameters and 7(f) gives the inverted preferred direction for our testing dataset. Figs. 8 and 9 give the results for training the model with an orthotropic dataset. Both the anisotropic coefficients attain nonzero values as can be seen in Fig. 8(b) 11 Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 203 (2025) 106161 A.A. Jadoon et al. Fig. 7. Results for data with unknown class and preferred direction from the transversely isotropic macroscale material model (a) Training loss over epochs, (b) Evolution of the anisotropic coefficients, (c) true (solid lines) and predicted stresses (dashed lines) over 𝐹11 on material parameters seen during training, (d) recovered direction of anisotropy, (e) true (dashed lines) and predicted parameters (solid lines with markers) over optimization iterations and (f) the inverted preferred direction for unseen data. indicating an orthotropic response and the existence of two preferred directions. Figs. 8(d) and 8(e) show these recovered preferred directions which closely align with the true directions the dataset was generated on. Fig. 9(a) shows the optimization steps while solving the inverse problem and the framework is able to correctly predict the material parameters it had not seen during training, whereas Figs. 9(b) and 9(c) give the inverted preferred directions for the testing dataset. Note that it is possible that the network swaps the two preferred directions for the orthotropic dataset. This does not affect the response in any way. However, in such a case, the design parameters are also swapped with the preferred directions. 12 Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 203 (2025) 106161 A.A. Jadoon et al. Fig. 8. Results for the forward problem for data with unknown class and preferred direction from the orthotropic macroscale material model (a) Training loss over epochs, (b) Evolution of the anisotropic coefficients, (c) true (solid lines) and predicted stresses (dashed lines) over 𝐹11 on material parameters seen during training, and (d,e) recovered directions of anisotropy. 5.2. Homogenized data An RVE can exhibit anisotropic behavior upon homogenization even if all the materials are modeled individually with an isotropic hyperelastic free energy. Therefore, we try to qualitatively see if anisotropy exists in our particular RVE. In all cases, an informed guess is made regarding the (an)isotropic behavior of the RVE which will be explained subsequently. There are multiple ways to ensure that the sampled deformation gradients have positive stretches such as rejection sampling, sampling from symmetric deformation gradients (Fuhg et al., 2021), or by relying on polar decomposition (Kalina et al., 2024b). We choose the latter for sampling 𝑁𝐹 deformation gradients that are applied within the following two RVE problems via periodic boundary conditions. The RVE simulations have been done within an in-house Matlab FE code. 13 Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 203 (2025) 106161 A.A. Jadoon et al. Fig. 9. Results for the inverse problem for data with unknown class and preferred direction from the orthotropic macroscale material model (a) True (dashed lines) and predicted parameters (solid lines with markers) over optimization iterations, and (b,c) inverted preferred directions. 5.2.1. RVE with a single spherical inclusion First, we consider an RVE with a single spherical inclusion at the center shown in Fig. 10. For both the inclusion and the matrix material, we use an isotropic hyperelastic law with a coupled form of a compressible neo-Hookean model (Holzapfel, 2002) as: ) 𝜆( 2 ) 𝜇( 𝛹= 𝐼 − ln 𝐼32 − 3 + 𝐼 − ln 𝐼32 − 1 , (42) 2 1 4 3 which gives the second Piola–Kirchhoff stresses as: 𝐒 = 𝜇(𝐈 − 𝐂−1 ) + 𝜆 2 −1 (𝐼 𝐂 − 𝐂−1 ) . 2 3 (43) 2𝜇𝜈 Here, 𝜇 denotes the shear modulus and 𝜆 = 1−2𝜈 , where 𝜈 represent the Poisson’s ratio. For the generation of homogenized stress– strain data, we can control the volume fraction 𝜙 of the inclusion through its radius 𝑅 and the stiffness ratio by prescribing varying 𝜇1 . The Poisson’s ratio is fixed to 𝜈 = 0.44 for both phases. As evident from Fig. 10, 𝜇1 represents the shear modulus of the inclusion 𝜇 2 whereas generate a total of 50 samples ( 𝜇2 )is the shear modulus of the matrix material which was chosen to 𝜇2 = 1(MPa. We ) 𝜇 from 𝜙, 𝜇1 ∈ [0.15, 0.35] × [0.25, 1.5] via Latin Hypercube Sampling. For each pair 𝜙𝑖 , 𝜇1 ∕𝜇2 𝑖 , 𝑁𝐹 = 13 ⋅ 20 deformation states 2 are prescribed within the RVE simulation. Thereby, the deformation gradients were sampled by first sampling 1000 deformation gradients, which seems sufficient as shown in Appendix C through LHS and then sorting in the invariant space to get rid of the redundant ones since two different deformation gradients can have the same invariants. An efficient way of covering the entire deformation gradient space is to then store the Cauchy–Green tensor and the associated stress at each load step (Kalina et al., 2024b), where 20 increments have been chosen.This gives us additional stress–strain tuples for the training data.1 Finally, we get a dataset of the form {𝜙𝑖 , (𝜇1 ∕𝜇2 )𝑖 , 𝐂𝑘 , 𝐒𝑘 } with 𝑖 = 1, … , 50 and 𝑘 = 1, … , 𝑁𝐹 . Hence, for all the combinations of these inputs, we get 50 × 260 data tuples. Here, 𝐒 represents homogenized macroscopic stresses. Fig. 11 shows the equivalent stresses in the RVE for different choices of design parameters. 1 In the sampling technique used for the deformation states, it was assumed that the effective behavior of the RVE is isotropic, cf. Kalina et al. (2024b) for more details on the sampling technique. A discussion on the isotropy of the RVE is given in Appendix D. 14 Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 203 (2025) 106161 A.A. Jadoon et al. Fig. 10. RVE of size 1 × 1 × 1 with a single spherical inclusion in the center. 𝜇 Fig. 11. Local stress fields for different values of 𝜙 and 𝜇1 under uniaxial loading of the single inclusion RVE. Shown is the component 𝑆11 of the second 2 Piola–Kirchhoff stress tensor for a macroscopi stretching of 𝜆1 = 1.45 in the 𝑥1 direction applied via periodic boundary conditions. An anisotropy index termed the Zener Index was presented in Zener (1948) as early as 1948. However, it was only applicable to cubic crystals. The idea was extended decades later to give a Universal Anisotropy Index (Ranganathan and Ostoja-Starzewski, 2008) that was applicable to all classes of anisotropy. A modified form of the Universal Anisotropy Index was presented in Sokołowski and Kamiński (2018) for the case where material exhibits no internal symmetries. However, all of these anisotropy indices are only applicable to small strain linear elasticity and do not distinguish between the secant and tangent modulus as pointed out in Vlassis et al. (2022). For the case of finite deformations and nonlinear elasticity, we get a fully populated tangent modulus which renders these anisotropy measures inapplicable. Therefore, in this work, we follow the approach presented in Yang et al. (2022) where (an)isotropic response is determined by applying pure shear deformations along different directions and if the material exhibits the same response for any direction shear deformations are applied in, we can conclude that the material is isotropic. In our case, we 15 Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 203 (2025) 106161 A.A. Jadoon et al. Fig. 12. Results for the single, spherical inclusion RVE with unknown class and preferred direction (a) Training loss over epochs, (b) Evolution of the anisotropic coefficients, (c) true (solid lines) and predicted stresses (dashed lines) over 𝐹11 on material parameters seen during training and (d) true (dashed lines) and predicted parameters (solid lines with markers) over optimization iterations. do this for four combinations of extreme values of the design parameters: the radius of the inclusion 𝑅 and the ratio of shear moduli 𝜇 for the inclusion and the matrix 𝜇1 . The resulting plots are presented in Appendix D and since the stress response overlaps for all 2 cases, we can expect an isotropic response for the chosen material parameters. It should be noted that RVEs with a single inclusion often show effective cubic properties in the small strain context (Vazic et al., 2022). However, it appears that isotropy holds for the ranges of material and geometric parameters we chose. Fig. 12 shows the results obtained for this RVE and the evolution of anisotropic coefficients going to zero, as can be seen in Fig. 12(b). This aligns with our preliminary study that our RVE exhibits isotropic responses. The inverse problem is solved in Fig. 12(d) and the model is accurately able to predict both the ratio of shear moduli for the inclusion and the matrix, as well as the radius of the inclusion. 5.2.2. RVE with unidirectional fibers Now we consider a different RVE embedded with fibers, all aligned in a single direction, as shown in Fig. 13. The free energy density for this RVE was formulated using the same neo-Hookean model as given in Eq. (42). The design parameters chosen for this 𝜇 RVE were again the ratio of shear moduli, 𝜇1 , and the volume fraction 𝜙. The ratio of shear moduli was further parameterized as 2 ( ( )) 𝜇 𝜇 log( 𝜇1 ) to be able to cover a wider design space. 50 sets from 𝜙, log 𝜇1 ∈ [0.15, 0.35] × [−2, 2] were sampled via Latin Hypercube 2 2 Sampling. 𝑁𝐹 = 42 ⋅ 20 deformation gradients were sampled using the same technique as for the single inclusion RVE. However, 𝜇 transverse isotropy was used here for filtering redundant states. In any case, we end up with a dataset of the form {log( 𝜇1 )𝑖 , 𝜙𝑖 , 𝐂𝑗 , 𝐒𝑗 } 2 where 𝑖 = 1, … , 50 and 𝑗 = 1, … , 𝑁𝐹 with the preferred direction 𝒏1 = (0, 0, 1). Such alignment results in a transversely isotropic response with the preferred direction of the response being the same as the orientation of the fibers (Kalina et al., 2023). However, training this dataset with a polyconvex NN is too restrictive as it is possible to lose polyconvexity during the homogenization process (Barchiesi, 2007; Braides, 1994; Kalina et al., 2024a). Therefore, we remove the polyconvexity requirements on our network for this dataset. Two methods of doing so are discussed here. The first, and most straightforward, technique would be to remove all the constraints on the neural network, i.e., using arbitrary activation functions and allowing negative weights. Although training this network gives good results as shown in Appendix E, this comes with a serious drawback. The end goal is to place these trained neural networks in a finite element solver at each integration point. These solvers 16 Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 203 (2025) 106161 A.A. Jadoon et al. Fig. 13. RVE with fibers oriented along 𝒏 = (0, 0, 1). extract not only the stresses but also the tangent moduli for each element to build a global stiffness matrix. Since the solution involves inverting this stiffness matrix, it needs to be positive semi-definite. However, having no constraints on the network would mean the stiffness matrix could violate positive definiteness rendering the inverse impossible. The second method is a bit more involved as it keeps the convexity and monotonicity constraints on the network but violates polyconvexity through the normalization term. Instead of using the normalization term presented in Eq. (31), we introduce a different term such that the stress normalization component of free energy reads: [ ] ∑ 𝛹𝑠𝑛 = −tr ( 𝜕̄ 𝛹 ̄ 𝑖 )(𝐂 − 𝐈) , (44) 𝑖 𝑖 where the bar represents that both the invariants and the bases are evaluated at 𝐂 = 𝐈. Although this modification still results in normalized stresses, we now have a subtraction operator in the free energy and are no longer polyconvex. However, since the tangent modulus requires the second derivative with regard to 𝐂, this new term does not appear in the tangent modulus and it preserves its positive definiteness. The forward and inverse problems for both these formulations on an anisotropic dataset are presented in Appendix F. Employing the latter formulation, Fig. 14(a) shows the evolution of loss during training and the fact that one of our anisotropic coefficients goes to zero whereas the other stays high, as shown in Fig. 14(b), indicates transversely isotropic behavior. The preferred direction for the training data shown in Fig. 14(d) matches with the true preferred direction. The stress response also agrees with the true one, even for deformation gradients outside the training set as evident from Fig. 14(c). The inverse problem was run on a dataset generated with design parameters not included in the training data along with a different preferred direction, i.e., 𝒏1 = (0, √1 , √1 ). The inverted material parameters are shown in Fig. 14(e) whereas the inverted preferred direction for this 2 2 dataset is shown in Fig. 14(f) thus highlighting the framework’s capabilities to work for a wide range of data while being trained on only a small subset of it. 5.3. Inverse problem in a finite element setting The framework was also integrated into a finite element solver by adopting a decoupled multiscale scheme approach. This methodology involves employing the pICNNs, trained offline, to give homogenized macroscopic responses at the integration points. Doing so, we then solve the inverse problem to get a targeted macroscopic response. The problem configuration is depicted in Fig. 15 where a simply supported beam is subjected to some displacement and the beam’s microstructure is chosen as the RVE with unidirectional fibers from the previous section with the same orientation throughout the beam. Along with the stresses, we also need the tangent modulus which can be calculated as: ∑[ ( ) ( )] C=4 𝜕 2 𝛹 𝜕𝐂 𝑖 ⊗ 𝜕𝐂 𝑖 + 𝜕𝑖 𝛹 𝜕𝐂2 𝑖 , (45) 𝑖 𝑖 where the subscript 𝑖 represents the active invariants based on the anisotropy class learned during training. This requires secondorder derivatives. Since the activation functions from Eq. (20) are continuously differentiable, the second derivatives through the network exist and are continuous. The neural network was implemented in an in-house PyTorch-based Finite Element model. We pose the following inverse problem: Find a suitable orientation of the fibers such that it minimizes the maximum von Mises stress 𝜇 across all elements. To this end, we evaluate five runs of the finite element model with fixed material parameters (log( 𝜇1 ) = 1.5, 𝛷 = 2 0.25) and different initial fiber orientations. Our goal is to invert the fiber orientation that gives the lowest von Mises stress. We do this by employing a Nelder–Mead (Nelder and Mead, 1965; Gao and Han, 2012) optimization scheme that starts off with a random initial fiber orientation and then updates these parameters using the information from the loss which we now write as: 𝐿 = ‖𝜎𝑉 𝑀max − 0‖22 , (46) 17 Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 203 (2025) 106161 A.A. Jadoon et al. Fig. 14. Results for the RVE with unidirectional fibers with unknown class and preferred direction (a) Training loss over epochs, (b) Evolution of the anisotropic coefficients, (c) true (solid lines) and predicted stresses (dashed lines) over 𝐹11 on material parameters seen during training, (d) Preferred directions learned during training (e) true (dashed lines) and predicted parameters (solid lines with markers) over optimization iterations and (f) the inverted preferred direction. where 𝜎𝑉 𝑀max is the predicted maximum von Mises stress. Fig. 16(a) shows the evolution of the maximum von Mises stress for five different initializations of the fiber orientation. We see that all five runs converged approximately to the same von Mises stress value. Fig. 16(b) shows the inverted preferred direction or the fiber orientation for the run with the lowest loss. Fig. 17 depicts the stress field with the inverted preferred direction. We remark, that out of these five runs, three converged to the same fiber orientation whereas two converged to a different one. However, even those runs converged approximately the same maximum von Mises stress, highlighting an apparent non-uniqueness which is a common issue with design optimization and symmetry in the design space (see e.g. Mahnken and Stein (1996) and 18 Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 203 (2025) 106161 A.A. Jadoon et al. Fig. 15. A simply supported beam subjected to displacement 𝑢0 . Fig. 16. Inverse problem results: (a) Evolution of the maximum von Mises stress for five different initializations of fiber orientation and (b) the inverted fiber orientation for the model with lowest loss. Mahnken (2004)). This non-uniqueness is also encountered in another example problem is presented in Appendix G where we invert design parameters to achieve a specific maximum von Mises stress. 6. Discussion In this work, we developed a computational framework for the inverse design of microstructures in anisotropic finite strain hyperelasticity. During the forward problem, the framework combines the prowess of partially input convex and tensor basis neural networks to learn the free energy density along with the anisotropy class and the preferred direction(s) of anisotropy. The first and second derivatives of the free energy can be used to derive the stresses and the tangent modulus respectively. Once we have a trained model, we can solve the inverse problem, i.e., given a set of deformation gradients and the corresponding stresses, the framework is accurately able to invert the material and geometric parameters that would give those stresses for the respective deformations. The framework only needs to be trained for a single set of preferred direction(s) and it can invert the preferred direction for the new set of stresses and deformation gradients. The framework was first tested against synthetic macroscopic data where it was able to provide an accurate representation of the stresses, and hence the free energy, and was also able to classify the anisotropic class and direction. The solution to the inverse problem gave correct material parameters even ones outside the training data set. The framework was then extended to a microstructural setting where two different RVEs were tested. The framework performed well on both the forward and the inverse problems. Out of the two RVEs, the one exhibiting transverse isotropy was assumed to represent the microstructure of a beam problem and implemented in a finite element setting. Since the framework had already 19 Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 203 (2025) 106161 A.A. Jadoon et al. Fig. 17. Stress field with the inverted fiber orientation. Fig. 18. Solution of the inverse problem for material parameters already seen during training for (a) isotropic, (b) transversely isotropic and (c) orthotropic classes for known anisotropy class and preferred direction. learned the macrostructural response during training, the solver was able to extract the stresses and the modulus at each integration point from the model to solve the inverse problem of finding the fiber orientation that would result in lowest maximum stress across all elements. The framework’s ability to solve the forward and inverse problems effectively, while fulfilling all the physical requirements, makes it a reliable tool for the design of microstructures with required properties. In future works, we plan to extend the framework to include inelastic material behavior, higher-order anisotropy, and multiphysics, see e.g. Rosenkranz et al. (2024), Jadoon et al. (2024), Kalina et al. (2024b) and Fuhg et al. (2024b). It can also prove useful for topology optimization (Vijayakumaran et al., 2024) and the design of functionally graded materials. 20 Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 203 (2025) 106161 A.A. Jadoon et al. Fig. 19. Solution of the inverse problem for material parameters already seen during training for (a) isotropic, (b) transversely isotropic and (c) orthotropic classes while learning anisotropy class and preferred direction. CRediT authorship contribution statement Asghar A. Jadoon: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Karl A. Kalina: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Data curation. Manuel K. Rausch: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft. Reese Jones: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology. Jan Niklas Fuhg: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Supervision, Methodology, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization. Declaration of competing interest The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Acknowledgments The authors acknowledge the Texas Advanced Computing Center (TACC) at The University of Texas at Austin for providing computational resources that have contributed to the research results reported within this paper. URL: http://www.tacc.utexas.edu The presented RVE computations were performed on a PC-Cluster at the Center for Information Services and High Performance Computing (ZIH) at TU Dresden. The authors thus thank the ZIH for generous allocations of computer time. K. A. Kalina thanks the German Research Foundation (DFG) for the support within the Research Training Group GRK 2868 D3–Project Number 493401063. Sandia National Laboratories is a multimission laboratory managed and operated by National Technology and Engineering Solutions of Sandia, LLC., a wholly owned subsidiary of Honeywell International, Inc., for the U.S. Department of Energy’s National Nuclear Security Administration under contract DE-NA-0003525. This paper describes objective technical results and analysis. Any subjective views or opinions that might be expressed in the paper do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Department of Energy or the United States Government. 21 Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 203 (2025) 106161 A.A. Jadoon et al. Fig. 20. Training loss for (a) isotropic, (b) transversely isotropic and (c) orthotropic classes with different sample sizes. The subscript in the legend denotes the number of samples chosen for each material parameter set. Appendix A. Stress normalization The procedure for stress normalization employed in the framework is outlined in this section. It closely follows the approach presented in Linden et al. (2023) with some modification. We write the free energy as: 𝛹 = 𝛹  + 𝛹 gr + 𝛹 n + 𝛹 sn (A.1) where 𝛹 𝑠𝑛 denotes the free energy associated with the stress normalization. Since 𝜓 𝑔 , by construction, results in normalized stress and 𝛹 𝑛 is only a constant, stress normalization boils down to: 𝐒(𝐂 = 𝐈) = 2𝜕𝐂̄ 𝛹  + 2𝜕𝐂̄ 𝛹 𝑠𝑛 = 𝐒 (𝐂 = 𝐈) + 𝐒𝑠𝑛 = 𝟎, (A.2) which gives: 𝐒𝑠𝑛 = −𝐒 (𝐂 = 𝐈), (A.3) Evaluating the derivative for 𝛹  at 𝐂 = 𝐈, not writing the potential superscript for clarity, we can write the resulting stresses as: [ ] 1 𝐒 (𝐂 = 𝐈) = 2 𝜕𝐼̄1 𝛹 𝐈 + 2𝜕𝐼̄2 𝛹 𝐈 + 𝜕𝐼̄3 𝛹 𝐈 − 𝜕𝐼̄4 𝛹 𝐈 2 [ ] + 2 𝜕𝐼̄5 𝛹 𝛼1 𝐍1 + 𝜕𝐼̄6 𝛹 (tr(𝛼1 𝐍1 )𝐈 − 𝛼1 𝐍1 ) [ ] + 2 𝜕𝐼̄7 𝛹 𝛼2 𝐍2 + 𝜕𝐼̄8 𝛹 (tr(𝛼2 𝐍2 )𝐈 − 𝛼2 𝐍2 ) . (A.4) 22 Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 203 (2025) 106161 A.A. Jadoon et al. Fig. 21. Stress fit for (a) isotropic, (b) transversely isotropic and (c) orthotropic classes for a sample size of 20 for each material parameter set. Rearranging, [ ] 1 𝐒 (𝐂 = 𝐈) = 2 𝜕𝐼̄1 𝛹 + 2𝜕𝐼̄2 𝛹 + 𝜕𝐼̄3 𝛹 − 𝜕𝐼̄4 𝛹 + 𝜕𝐼̄6 𝛹 tr(𝛼1 𝐍1 ) + 𝜕𝐼̄8 𝛹 tr(𝛼2 𝐍2 ) 𝐈 [ ] 2 + 2 𝜕𝐼̄5 𝛹 − 𝜕𝐼̄6 𝛹 𝛼1 𝐍1 [ ] + 2 𝜕𝐼̄7 𝛹 − 𝜕𝐼̄8 𝛹 𝛼2 𝐍2 From Eq. (A.3), we get: [ ] 1 𝐒𝑠𝑛 = −2 𝜕𝐼̄1 𝛹 + 2𝜕𝐼̄2 𝛹 + 𝜕𝐼̄3 𝛹 − 𝜕𝐼̄4 𝛹 + 𝜕𝐼̄6 𝛹 tr(𝛼1 𝐍1 ) + 𝜕𝐼̄8 𝛹 tr(𝛼2 𝐍2 ) 𝐈 2 [ ] + 2 𝜕𝐼̄6 𝛹 − 𝜕𝐼̄5 𝛹 𝛼1 𝐍1 [ ] + 2 𝜕𝐼̄8 𝛹 − 𝜕𝐼̄7 𝛹 𝛼2 𝐍2 (A.5) (A.6) Now we need to find a form for the potential 𝛹 𝑠𝑛 which results in these stresses while ensuring polyconvexity. Letting p = 𝜕𝐼̄6 𝛹 (A.7a) q = 𝜕𝐼̄5 𝛹 (A.7b) r = 𝜕𝐼̄8 𝛹 (A.7c) s = 𝜕𝐼̄7 𝛹 (A.7d) and [ ] 1 n̄ = 2 𝜕𝐼̄1 𝛹 + 2𝜕𝐼̄2 𝛹 + 𝜕𝐼̄3 𝛹 − 𝜕𝐼̄4 𝛹 + ptr(𝛼1 𝐍1 ) + rtr(𝛼2 𝐍2 ) 2 we can write: ̄ + 2(p − q)𝛼1 𝐍1 + 2(r − s)𝛼2 𝐍2 𝐒̄ 𝑠𝑛 = −2n𝐈 (A.8) (A.9) 23 Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 203 (2025) 106161 A.A. Jadoon et al. 𝜇 𝜇 Fig. 22. Stress response under shear loading for an RVE with a single spherical inclusion with material parameters (a) 𝑅 = 0.1, 𝜇1 = 0.25, (b) 𝑅 = 0.1, 𝜇1 = 1.5, 𝜇 (c) 𝑅 = 0.5, 𝜇1 2 𝜇 = 0.25 and (d) 𝑅 = 0.5, 𝜇1 2 2 2 = 1.5. We first choose a potential of the form ̄ 3 − ̄3 ) + p(5 − ̄5 ) + q(6 − ̄6 ) + r(7 − ̄7 ) + s(8 − ̄8 ), 𝛹̂ 𝑠𝑛 = −n( (A.10) where the bar represents the invariants evaluated at 𝐂 = 𝐈 and are constant. These ensure that free energy is zero at the undeformed configuration but do not appear in the derivatives since they are constant. Then the stresses resulting from this potential read: ̄ 𝐂−1 + 2p𝛼1 𝐍1 + 2q[𝛼1 tr((Cof𝐂)𝐍1 )𝐂−1 − 𝛼1 (Cof𝐂)𝐍1 𝐂−1 ] 𝐒̂ 𝑠𝑛 = −n𝐽 + 2r𝛼2 𝐍2 + 2s[𝛼2 tr((Cof𝐂)𝐍2 )𝐂−1 − 𝛼2 (Cof𝐂)𝐍2 𝐂−1 ], At 𝐂 = 𝐈, ̄ + 2p𝛼1 𝐍1 + 2q[𝛼1 tr(𝐍1 )𝐈 − 𝛼1 𝐍1 ] + 2r𝛼2 𝐍2 + 2s[𝛼2 tr(𝐍2 )𝐈 − 𝛼2 𝐍2 ], 𝐒̂ 𝑠𝑛 = −n𝐈 (A.11) (A.12) Writing Eq. (A.5) in terms of newly defined variables, we have ̄ − 2p𝛼1 𝐍1 + 2q𝛼1 𝐍1 − 2r𝛼2 𝐍2 + 2s𝛼2 𝐍2 𝐒 (𝐂 = 𝐈) = n𝐈 (A.13) From Eq. (A.2), 𝐒 (𝐂 = 𝐈) + 𝐒̂ 𝑠𝑛 = 2q𝛼1 tr(𝐍1 )𝐈 + 2s𝛼2 tr(𝐍2 )𝐈 ≠ 𝟎, (A.14) Therefore, we introduce a new variable ] [ 1 o = 2 𝜕𝐼̄1 𝛹 + 2𝜕𝐼̄2 𝛹 + 𝜕𝐼̄3 𝛹 − 𝜕𝐼̄4 𝛹 + (p + q)tr(𝛼1 𝐍1 ) + (r + s)tr(𝛼2 𝐍2 ) 2 and modify the free energy potential as: 𝛹 𝑠𝑛 = −o(3 − ̄3 ) + p(5 − ̄5 ) + q(6 − ̄6 ) + r(7 − ̄7 ) + s(8 − ̄8 ), (A.15) (A.16) This is the final form of our stress normalization part of the potential. It is evident that such a potential would fulfill the requirement from Eq. (A.2) while still being polyconvex. Since it is a linear equation in 3 , i.e., 𝐽 , terms with o do not appear in the 24 Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 203 (2025) 106161 A.A. Jadoon et al. Fig. 23. Results for the RVE with unidirectional fibers with unknown class and preferred direction from the material model (a) Training loss over epochs, (b) Evolution of the anisotropic coefficients, (c) true (solid lines) and predicted stresses (dashed lines) over 𝐹11 on material parameters seen during training, (d) Preferred directions learned during training (e) true (dashed lines) and predicted parameters (solid lines with markers) over optimization iterations and (f) the inverted preferred direction. hessian and therefore can have the negative sign with them. Whereas all the other terms involve polyconvex invariants multiplied with some positive constants since we have a monotonically increasing neural network and therefore preserve polyconvexity of the free energy. Appendix B. Recovering parameters seen during training In order to check the efficacy of our inverse design framework, we run the inverse problem for material parameters seen during training as a part of the training dataset noting that the framework should, at least, be able to recover accurately the material 25 Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 203 (2025) 106161 A.A. Jadoon et al. Fig. 24. A comparison of (a,b) loss, (c,d) anisotropic coefficient learning, (e,f) stress-fit and (g,f) inverse problem for nonpolyconvex free energy with the stress normalization term from Eq. (44) (formulation 1) and an unconstrained neural network (formulation 2). 26 Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 203 (2025) 106161 A.A. Jadoon et al. Fig. 25. Plate setup. Fig. 26. True response for von Mises stress and displacement along y-axis. parameters it was trained on. Fig. 18 shows the recovered material parameters for the case of known anisotropy class and preferred direction whereas Fig. 19 shows the results for the inverse problem for the case where our model learns the class and orientation of anisotropy during the training process. As evident from the figures, we are able to recover exactly the material parameters seen during training. Appendix C. Parameter study Efficient sampling strategies can help reduce the size of training datasets while ensuring a complete exploration of the sampling space. In our framework, we sample from the deformation gradient space using Latin Hypercube Sampling (Stein, 1987). Since it is a nice-dimensional space, although bounded, we would theoretically require a large number of samples. However, since our framework requires stress–strain data for different material parameters, we can reduce the required number of deformation gradients for one set of material parameters. The idea is to sample the deformation gradients independently for each material parameter set, thereby reducing the number of samples altogether while ensuring the samples are space-filling. We carried out a comparative study for different sample sizes and the training losses for the model are presented in Fig. 20 with the subscripts in the legend denoting the number of independently sampled deformation gradients for each set of material parameters. It can be seen that the evolution of the loss function follows the same trajectory for the different sample sizes. Fig. 21 shows the stress response for a known material parameter set under uniaxial loading for the sample size of 20. The stress response from the neural network derivatives matches with the true stress response. Since the deformation gradients associated with uniaxial loading were not explicitly included in the training dataset, a good stress fit in this case confirms a good exploration of the deformation gradient space. This can be accredited to the fact that even with 20 deformation gradient samples if we have two material parameters with five samples each, we effectively have 500 deformation gradient samples. 27 Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 203 (2025) 106161 A.A. Jadoon et al. Fig. 27. Evolution of the (a) loss, (b) maximum von Mises stress, (c) volume fraction and (d) the angle 𝜃 (degrees) for the inverse problem. The dashed lines show the design parameters’ values data was generated with. Appendix D. Isotropy of the RVE with a single spherical inclusion Fig. 22 shows the results of the numerical experiment carried out on the RVE with a single spherical inclusion to confirm an isotropic response. The stress response for shear deformations in all directions overlap with each other, implying isotropy. Appendix E. Violation of polyconvexity through network constraints In this section, we present the results for the forward and inverse problem on the unidirectional fiber RVE for an unconstrained neural network. Fig. 23(a) shows the loss evolution during training which seems to fluctuate a bit more than the other formulation where we violate polyconvexity through the normalization term. It is still able to learn the anisotropy class and the preferred directions as shown in Figs. 23(b) and 23(d) with an almost perfect stress-fit under uniaxial loading as illustrated in Fig. 23(c). The model works well on the inverse problem as well, recovering the desired design parameters and inverting the correct preferred direction as can be seen in Figs. 23(e) and 23(f). Appendix F. Nonpolyconvex formulations for macroscale data This section presents a brief comparison of two formulations outlined in Section 5.2.2 when training a nonpolyconvex free energy function. Stress–strain tuples were generated using the isotropic material model and both formulations were tested and compared under forward and inverse problems. Here, we denote the formulation with the normalization component from Eq. (44) as formulation 1 while formulation 2 represents an unconstrained neural network. Figs. 24(a) and 24(b) compare the loss evolution while Figs. 24(c) and 24(d) show the anisotropic coefficient learning during the forward process for each framework. Figs. 24(e) and 24(f) compare the stress response for each formulation whereas Figs. 24(g) and 24(h) give the inverted design parameters for each. As noted before, both formulations work are comparable in terms of performance but the positive definiteness of the tangent modulus may necessitate the use of formulation 1. 28 Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 203 (2025) 106161 A.A. Jadoon et al. Fig. 28. von Mises stress distribution for four of the converged analysis. Appendix G. Inverse problem for a plate under uniaxial tension In this section, another microstructural inverse design problem is presented that aims to attain a desired mechanical response at the macroscale. Dirichlet boundary conditions were applied on the plate geometry shown in Fig. 25 which is designed to be embedded with the unidirectional fiber RVE and solved using a 3D finite element solver. We aim to find the volume fraction 𝛷 and the in-plane angle 𝜃 (parameterizing in-plane fiber orientations) inside the plate that would result in a specific maximum value of the von Mises stress. Hence, the loss function for this problem reads: 𝐿 = ‖𝜎𝑉 𝑀max − 𝜎̂ 𝑉 𝑀max ‖22 , (G.1) where 𝜎𝑉 𝑀max and 𝜎̂ 𝑉 𝑀max represent the predicted (across the whole domain) and true maximum von Mises stress respectively. 𝜇 We synthetically derive a target von Mises value by running the FE analysis with fixed parameters i.e. log( 𝜇1 ) = 1.2, 𝛷 = 0.25 and 2 𝜃 = 30 degrees. The von Mises stress throughout the plate and the displacement along y-axis are shown in Fig. 26. The maximum von Mises stress observed is 𝜎𝑉 𝑀𝑚𝑎𝑥 = 1.92. Then, we run a Nelder–Mead optimization algorithm to solve the inverse problem. The optimization is stopped when the 𝜇 maximum difference in the design parameter values for two consecutive optimization steps is less than 10−3 . With log( 𝜇1 ) fixed, 2 we run the inverse problem with 10 different initializations of 𝛷 and 𝜃. Fig. 27 reports the evolution of the loss, the maximum von Mises stress and the design parameters over the optimization steps. We see that the solution appears to be non-unique or at least 29 Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 203 (2025) 106161 A.A. Jadoon et al. Fig. 29. Evolution of the (a) loss, (b) maximum stress along y-axis and (c) the angle 𝜃 (degrees) for the inverse problem with only 𝜃 as the design variable. The dashed lines shows the 𝜃 value data was generated with. has a significant amount of local optima around the ground truth. For different combinations of the fiber orientation and volume fraction, we can attain the same von Mises stress. The von Mises stress across the plate for four of these runs is shown in Fig. 28 and they all seem to be in good agreement with each other. In order to test our framework on a problem with a unique solution, we fix 𝛷 = 0.25 and use the maximum 𝜎𝑦𝑦 (𝜎𝑦𝑦𝑚𝑎𝑥 = 1.906) as the target stress, while only inverting for the fiber orientation. Thus the loss function reads: 𝐿 = ‖𝜎𝑦𝑦max − 𝜎̂ 𝑦𝑦max ‖22 , (G.2) with similar notations as before. The results are shown in Fig. 29 where the maximum stress along the y-axis converges to the true value while the inverted 𝜃 for all the runs converges to the original fiber orientation. Thus we can conclude that the non-uniqueness is more apparent when multiple design parameters are involved. However, this can be used to our advantage as, for example, we can try to minimize the volume fraction and find the fiber orientation that would give a similar mechanical response, thereby reducing the required material and in turn its cost. Data availability Data will be made available on request. References Alibert, J.J., Dacorogna, B., 1992. An example of a quasiconvex function that is not polyconvex in two dimensions. Arch. Ration. Mech. Anal. 117 (2), 155–166. Amos, B., Xu, L., Kolter, J.Z., 2017. Input convex neural networks. In: International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, pp. 146–155. Aubert, G., 1987. On a counterexample of a rank 1 convex function which is not polyconvex in the case N=2. Proc. R. Soc. Edinb.: Sect. A Math. 106 (3–4), 237–240. 30 Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 203 (2025) 106161 A.A. Jadoon et al. Babuška, I., 1976. Homogenization approach in engineering. In: Computing Methods in Applied Sciences and Engineering: Second International Symposium December 15–19, 1975. Springer, pp. 137–153. Ball, J.M., 1976. Convexity conditions and existence theorems in nonlinear elasticity. Arch. Ration. Mech. Anal. 63 (4), 337–403. Barchiesi, M., 2007. Loss of polyconvexity by homogenization: a new example. Calc. Var. Partial Differential Equations 30 (2), 215–230. Boehler, J.-P., 1987. Representations for isotropic and anisotropic non-polynomial tensor functions. In: Applications of Tensor Functions in Solid Mechanics. Springer, pp. 31–53. Bonet, J., Burton, A.J., 1998. A simple orthotropic, transversely isotropic hyperelastic constitutive equation for large strain computations. Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 162 (1–4), 151–164. Boyd, S.P., Vandenberghe, L., 2004. Convex Optimization. Cambridge Univ. Pr.. Braides, A., 1994. Loss of polyconvexity by homogenization. Arch. Ration. Mech. Anal. 127, 183–190. Budiansky, B., 1965. On the elastic moduli of some heterogeneous materials. J. Mech. Phys. Solids 13 (4), 223–227. Chen, C.H., Cheng, S., 1970. Mechanical properties of anisotropic fiber-reinforced composites. J. Appl. Mech. 37 (1), 186. Ciarlet, P.G., 1988. Mathematical Elasticity: Three-Dimensional Elasticity. SIAM. Courtney, T.H., 2005. Mechanical Behavior of Materials. Waveland Press. Datta, P., Vyas, V., Dhara, S., Chowdhury, A.R., Barui, A., 2019. Anisotropy properties of tissues: a basis for fabrication of biomimetic anisotropic scaffolds for tissue engineering. J. Bionic Eng. 16 (5), 842–868. Eshelby, J.D., 1957. The determination of the elastic field of an ellipsoidal inclusion, and related problems. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. Ser. A Math. Phys. Sci. 241 (1226), 376–396. Feyel, F., 1999. Multiscale FE2 elastoviscoplastic analysis of composite structures. Comput. Mater. Sci. 16 (1–4), 344–354. Flaschel, M., Kumar, S., De Lorenzis, L., 2021. Unsupervised discovery of interpretable hyperelastic constitutive laws. Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 381, 113852. Frankel, A.L., Jones, R.E., Swiler, L.P., 2020. Tensor basis gaussian process models of hyperelastic materials. J. Mach. Learn. Model. Comput. 1 (1). Fuhg, J.N., Anantha Padmanabha, G., Bouklas, N., Bahmani, B., Sun, W., Vlassis, N.N., Flaschel, M., Carrara, P., De Lorenzis, L., 2024a. A review on data-driven constitutive laws for solids. Arch. Comput. Methods Eng. 1–43. Fuhg, J.N., Böhm, C., Bouklas, N., Fau, A., Wriggers, P., Marino, M., 2021. Model-data-driven constitutive responses: application to a multiscale computational framework. Internat. J. Engrg. Sci. 167, 103522. Fuhg, J.N., Bouklas, N., 2022. On physics-informed data-driven isotropic and anisotropic constitutive models through probabilistic machine learning and space-filling sampling. Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 394, 114915. Fuhg, J.N., Bouklas, N., Jones, R.E., 2022a. Learning hyperelastic anisotropy from data via a tensor basis neural network. J. Mech. Phys. Solids 168, 105022. Fuhg, J.N., Jadoon, A., Weeger, O., Seidl, D.T., Jones, R.E., 2024b. Polyconvex neural network models of thermoelasticity. J. Mech. Phys. Solids 192, 105837. Fuhg, J.N., Marino, M., Bouklas, N., 2022b. Local approximate Gaussian process regression for data-driven constitutive models: development and comparison with neural networks. Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 388, 114217. Gao, F., Han, L., 2012. Implementing the nelder-mead simplex algorithm with adaptive parameters. Comput. Optim. Appl. 51 (1), 259–277. Geers, M.G.D., Kouznetsova, V.G., Brekelmans, W.A.M., 2010. Multi-scale computational homogenization: Trends and challenges. J. Comput. Appl. Math. 234 (7), 2175–2182, Fourth International Conference on Advanced COmputational Methods in ENgineering (ACOMEN 2008). Geers, M.G.D., Kouznetsova, V.G., Matouš, K., Yvonnet, J., 2017. Homogenization methods and multiscale modeling: Nonlinear problems. ISBN: 9781119176817. Geers, M.G.D., Yvonnet, J., 2016. Multiscale modeling of microstructure–property relations. MRS Bull. 41 (8), 610–616. Ghosh, S., Lee, K., Moorthy, S., 1996. Two scale analysis of heterogeneous elastic-plastic materials with asymptotic homogenization and voronoi cell finite element model. Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 132 (1–2), 63–116. Guild, F.J., Summerscales, J., 1993. Microstructural image analysis applied to fibre composite materials: a review. Composites 24 (5), 383–393. Gurtin, M.E., 1982. An Introduction to Continuum Mechanics, vol. 158, Academic Press. Hansen, N., 2016. The CMA evolution strategy: A tutorial. CoRR, abs/1604.00772. Hansen, N., Müller, S.D., Koumoutsakos, P., 2003. Reducing the time complexity of the derandomized evolution strategy with covariance matrix adaptation (CMA-ES). Evol. Comput. 11 (1), 1–18. Hartmann, S., Neff, P., 2003. Polyconvexity of generalized polynomial-type hyperelastic strain energy functions for near-incompressibility. Int. J. Solids Struct. 40 (11), 2767–2791. Hashin, Z., Shtrikman, S., 1963. A variational approach to the theory of the elastic behaviour of multiphase materials. J. Mech. Phys. Solids 11 (2), 127–140. Hill, R., 1972. On constitutive macro-variables for heterogeneous solids at finite strain. Proc. R. Soc. A 326 (1565), 131–147. Holzapfel, G.A., 2002. Nonlinear solid mechanics: a continuum approach for engineering science. Meccanica 37 (4), 489–490. Holzapfel, G.A., Gasser, T.C., Ogden, R.W., 2000. A new constitutive framework for arterial wall mechanics and a comparative study of material models. J. Elast. Phys. Sci. Solids 61 (1), 1–48. Hornik, K., Stinchcombe, M., White, H., 1989. Multilayer feedforward networks are universal approximators. Neural Netw. 2 (5), 359–366. Horstemeyer, M.F., 2010. Multiscale modeling: a review. Pr. Asp. Comput. Chem.: Methods Concepts Appl. 87–135. Itskov, M., Aksel, N., 2004. A class of orthotropic and transversely isotropic hyperelastic constitutive models based on a polyconvex strain energy function. Int. J. Solids Struct. 41 (14), 3833–3848. Jadoon, A.A., Meyer, K.A., Fuhg, J.N., 2024. Automated model discovery of finite strain elastoplasticity from uniaxial experiments. arXiv preprint arXiv: 2408.14615. Kalina, K.A., Brummund, J., Sun, W., Kästner, M., 2024a. Neural networks meet anisotropic hyperelasticity: A framework based on generalized structure tensors and isotropic tensor functions. Kalina, K.A., Gebhart, P., Brummund, J., Linden, L., Sun, W., Kästner, M., 2024b. Neural network-based multiscale modeling of finite strain magneto-elasticity with relaxed convexity criteria. Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 421, 116739. Kalina, K.A., Linden, L., Brummund, J., Kästner, M., 2023. FE ANN: an efficient data-driven multiscale approach based on physics-constrained neural networks and automated data mining. Comput. Mech. 71 (5), 827–851. Kingma, D.P., Ba, J., 2014. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980. Klein, D.K., Fernández, M., Martin, R.J., Neff, P., Weeger, O., 2022. Polyconvex anisotropic hyperelasticity with neural networks. J. Mech. Phys. Solids 159, 104703. Klein, D.K., Roth, F.J., Valizadeh, I., Weeger, O., 2023. Parametrized polyconvex hyperelasticity with physics-augmented neural networks. Data- Cent. Eng. 4, e25. Kok, Y., Tan, X.P., Wang, P., Nai, M., Loh, N.H., Liu, E., Tor, S.B., 2018. Anisotropy and heterogeneity of microstructure and mechanical properties in metal additive manufacturing: A critical review. Mater. Des. 139, 565–586. Kružík, M., Roubíček, T., 2019. Mathematical Methods in Continuum Mechanics of Solids. Springer. Kumar, S., Tan, S., Zheng, L., Kochmann, D.M., 2020. Inverse-designed spinodoid metamaterials. Npj Comput. Mater. 6 (1), 73. Lee, J., Park, D., Lee, M., Lee, H., Park, K., Lee, I., Ryu, S., 2023. Machine learning-based inverse design methods considering data characteristics and design space size in materials design and manufacturing: a review. Mater. Horizons 10 (12), 5436–5456. 31 Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 203 (2025) 106161 A.A. Jadoon et al. Linden, L., Klein, D.K., Kalina, K.A., Brummund, J., Weeger, O., Kästner, M., 2023. Neural networks meet hyperelasticity: A guide to enforcing physics. J. Mech. Phys. Solids 179, 105363. Linka, K., Kuhl, E., 2023. A new family of constitutive artificial neural networks towards automated model discovery. Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 403, 115731. Luo, H.A., Weng, G.J., 1987. On Eshelby’s inclusion problem in a three-phase spherically concentric solid, and a modification of Mori-Tanaka’s method. Mech. Mater. 6 (4), 347–361. Mahnken, R., 2004. Identification of material parameters for constitutive equations. Encycl. Comput. Mech.. Mahnken, R., Stein, E., 1996. Parameter identification for viscoplastic models based on analytical derivatives of a least-squares functional and stability investigations. Int. J. Plast. 12 (4), 451–479. Milton, G.W., Kohn, R.V., 1988. Variational bounds on the effective moduli of anisotropic composites. J. Mech. Phys. Solids 36 (6), 597–629. Mori, T., Tanaka, K., 1973. Average stress in matrix and average elastic energy of materials with misfitting inclusions. Acta Metall. 21 (5), 571–574. Mortazavian, S., Fatemi, A., 2015. Effects of fiber orientation and anisotropy on tensile strength and elastic modulus of short fiber reinforced polymer composites. Compos. Part B: Eng. 72, 116–129. Nelder, J.A., Mead, R., 1965. A simplex method for function minimization. Comput. J. 7 (4), 308–313. Newnham, R.E., 2005. Properties of Materials: Anisotropy, Symmetry, Structure. Oxford University Press. Nguyen, T.D., Jones, R.E., Boyce, B.L., 2007. Modeling the anisotropic finite-deformation viscoelastic behavior of soft fiber-reinforced composites. Int. J. Solids Struct. 44 (25–26), 8366–8389. Ogden, R.W., 1974. On the overall moduli of non-linear elastic composite materials. J. Mech. Phys. Solids 22 (6), 541–553. Ogden, R.W., 1997. Non-Linear Elastic Deformations. Courier Corporation. Paszke, A., Gross, S., Massa, F., Lerer, A., Bradbury, J., Chanan, G., Killeen, T., Lin, Z., Gimelshein, N., Antiga, L., Desmaison, A., Kopf, A., Yang, E., DeVito, Z., Raison, M., Tejani, A., Chilamkurthy, S., Steiner, B., Fang, L., Bai, J., Chintala, S., 2019. PyTorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library. In: Wallach, H., Larochelle, H., Beygelzimer, A., dÁlché Buc, F., Fox, E., Garnett, R. (Eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32. Curran Associates, Inc., pp. 8024–8035. Pinsky, P.M., Van Der Heide, D., Chernyak, D., 2005. Computational modeling of mechanical anisotropy in the cornea and sclera. J. Cataract. Refract. Surg. 31 (1), 136–145. Raju, K., Tay, T.-E., Tan, V.B.C., 2021. A review of the FE 2 method for composites. Multiscale Multidiscip. Model. Exp. Des. 4, 1–24. Ranganathan, S.I., Ostoja-Starzewski, M., 2008. Universal elastic anisotropy index. Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 055504. Reuss, A., 1929. Berechnung der fließgrenze von Mischkristallen auf Grund der Plastizitätsbedingung für Einkristalle. ZAMM - J. Appl. Math. Mech. / Z. Angew. Math. Mech. 9 (1), 49–58. Rosenkranz, M., Kalina, K.A., Brummund, J., Sun, W., Kästner, M., 2024. Viscoelasticty with physics-augmented neural networks: Model formulation and training methods without prescribed internal variables. Comput. Mech. 1–23. Sachs, G., 1929. Zur ableitung einer fließbedingung. In: Mitteilungen der deutschen Materialprüfungsanstalten: Sonderheft IX: Arbeiten aus dem Kaiser Wilhelm-Institut für Metallforschung und demStaatlichen Materialprüfungsamt zu Berlin-Dahlem. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 94–97. Saeb, S., Steinmann, P., Javili, A., 2016. Aspects of computational homogenization at finite deformations: a unifying review from Reuss’ to Voigt’s bound. Appl. Mech. Rev. 68 (5), 050801. Schröder, J., 2014. A numerical two-scale homogenization scheme: the FE2-method. In: Plasticity and beyond: Microstructures, Crystal-Plasticity and Phase Transitions. Springer, pp. 1–64. Schumacher, C., Bickel, B., Rys, J., Marschner, S., Daraio, C., Gross, M.H., 2015. Microstructures to control elasticity in 3D printing. ACM Trans. Graph. 34, 1–13. Sokołowski, D., Kamiński, M., 2018. Homogenization of carbon/polymer composites with anisotropic distribution of particles and stochastic interface defects. Acta Mech. 229 (9), 3727–3765. Stein, M., 1987. Large sample properties of simulations using latin hypercube sampling. Technometrics 29 (2), 143–151. Surjadi, J.U., Gao, L., Du, H., Li, X., Xiong, X., Fang, N.X., Lu, Y., 2019. Mechanical metamaterials and their engineering applications. Adv. Eng. Mater. 21 (3), 1800864. Svendsen, B., 1994. On the representation of constitutive relations using structure tensors. Internat. J. Engrg. Sci. 32 (12), 1889–1892. Taylor, G.I., 1938. Plastic strain in metals. 8th May-Lecture of the Institute of Metals, vol. 62, pp. 307–325. Thakolkaran, P., Espinal, M., Dhulipala, S., Kumar, S., Portela, C.M., 2025. Experiment-informed finite-strain inverse design of spinodal metamaterials. Extrem. Mech. Lett. 74, 102274. Tian, J., Tang, K., Chen, X., Wang, X., 2022. Machine learning-based prediction and inverse design of 2D metamaterial structures with tunable deformation-dependent Poisson’s ratio. Nanoscale 14 (35), 12677–12691. Trimby, P.W., Prior, D.J., 1999. Microstructural imaging techniques: a comparison between light and scanning electron microscopy. Tectonophysics 303 (1–4), 71–81. Vazic, B., Abali, B.E., Yang, H., Newell, P., 2022. Mechanical analysis of heterogeneous materials with higher-order parameters. Eng. Comput. 1–17. Vijayakumaran, H., Russ, J.B., Paulino, G.H., Bessa, M.A., 2024. Consistent machine learning for topology optimization with microstructure-dependent neural network material models. Vlassis, N.N., Ma, R., Sun, W., 2020. Geometric deep learning for computational mechanics part I: Anisotropic hyperelasticity. Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 371, 113299. Vlassis, N.N., Sun, W., 2021. Sobolev training of thermodynamic-informed neural networks for interpretable elasto-plasticity models with level set hardening. Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 377, 113695. Vlassis, N.N., Zhao, P., Ma, R., Sewell, T., Sun, W., 2022. Molecular dynamics inferred transfer learning models for finite-strain hyperelasticity of monoclinic crystals: Sobolev training and validations against physical constraints. Internat. J. Numer. Methods Engrg. 123 (17), 3922–3949. Voigt, W., 1889. Ueber die Beziehung zwischen den beiden Elasticitätsconstanten isotroper Körper. Ann. Phys., Lpz. 274 (12), 573–587. Wang, J., Wang, Y., Chen, Y., 2022. Inverse design of materials by machine learning. Materials 15 (5), 1811. Weinan, E., 2011. Principles of Multiscale Modeling. Cambridge University Press. Willis, J.R., 1977. Bounds and self-consistent estimates for the overall properties of anisotropic composites. J. Mech. Phys. Solids 25 (3), 185–202. Wu, J., Sigmund, O., Groen, J.P., 2021. Topology optimization of multi-scale structures: a review. Struct. Multidiscip. Optim. 63, 1455–1480. Yang, P., Guo, Z., Hu, N., Sun, W., Chen, Y., 2022. Hyperelastic behaviors of closed-cell porous materials at a wide porosity range. Compos. Struct. 294, 115792. Yang, G., Kabel, J., Van Rietbergen, B., Odgaard, A., Huiskes, R.I.K., Cown, S.C., 1998. The anisotropic Hooke’s law for cancellous bone and wood. J. Elasticity 53 (2), 125–146. Zee, L., Sternberg, E., 1983. Ordinary and strong ellipticity in the equilibrium theory of incompressible hyperelastic solids. Arch. Ration. Mech. Anal. 83 (1), 53–90. Zener, C., 1948. Elasticity and anelasticity of metals. Chicago University Committee on Publications in the Physical Sciences, University of Chicago Press. Zhang, J.M., Rychlewski, J., 1990. Structural tensors for anisotropic solids. Arch. Mech. 42 (3), 267–277. Zheng, X., Zhang, X., Chen, T.-T., Watanabe, I., 2023. Deep learning in mechanical metamaterials: from prediction and generation to inverse design. Adv. Mater. 35 (45), 2302530. Zohdi, T.I., Wriggers, P., 2001. Computational micro-macro material testing. Arch. Comput. Methods Eng. 8 (2), 131–228. 32