Advances in the Science and Engineering of Casting Solidification Edited by: Laurentiu Nastac, Baicheng Liu, Hasse Fredriksson, Jacques Lacaze, Chun-Pyo Hong, Adrian V. Catalina, Andreas Buhrig-Polaczek, Charles Monroe, Adrian S. Sabau, 5R[DQD(OHQD/LJLD5X[DQGD$ODQ/XR6XEKD\X6HQDQG$WWLOD'LyV]HJL TMS (The Minerals, Metals & Materials Society), 2015 STRUCTURE AND CASTING DEFECTS OF ALUMINUM BILLETS PRODUCED BY DIRECT-CHILL CASTING D.G. Eskin1,2 1 Brunel University, Brunel Centre for Advanced Solidification Technology, Uxbridge UB8 3PH, United Kingdom 2 Tomsk State University, Tomsk, 634050 Russian Federation Keywords: Aluminum, Cold crack, Direct-chill casting, Hot tear, Macrosegregation, Residual stress, Transition region, Thermal contraction Abstract Direct-chill (DC) casting is the main technology of round billets and flat ingots intended for further deformation. This casting technology has many advantages in control of the solidification and achieving high quality of the cast metal. On the other hand, ever increasing requirements to the soundness, mechanical and service properties of aluminium alloys as well as to increased output demand for deep understanding of the processes and mechanisms that control the formation of structure and defects during solidification. A combination of advanced computer simulation and dedicated experiments allows a modern scientist to achieve much better insight into the processing involved and suggest means of improving the quality of the castings. This paper presents an overview of research in the mechanisms of macrosegregation, hot and cold cracking in aluminium billets and the ways to control these defects by the control of process parameters and structure. The paper is illustrated with own results. Introduction Direct-chill casting of aluminum alloys is a well developed technology with a rather long history [1, 2, 3]. At the same time, despite 60 years of extensive research and practice, the formation of structure, defects and properties of billets and ingots produced by direct-chill (DC) casting is still not completely understood. On the other hand, many phenomena have been discovered and interconnected, and a general pattern starts to emerge from different bits and pieces [4]. The development in the last 20 years of computer modeling and simulations, driven mainly by the industrial need to optimize and automate the casting process, gives a powerful tool to a researcher. Computer simulation allows a scientist to artificially uncouple the physical processes involved in the formation of a complex real-life pattern and to evaluate the individual effects. In addition, the quantities that are difficult or impossible to measure experimentally can be examined using computer simulations, for example temperature distribution and flow patterns in the sump of a billet. Structure formation The structure formed in billets and ingots during direct-chill casting is characterized by several distinct features that result from peculiar thermal and mass transfer during solidification and have consequences for the quality of the final as-cast product. The grain size and dendrite arm spacing distribute unevenly across the thickness of the billet (ingot) as shown in Fig. 1. The main reason for the variation in size is the cooling regime with specific zones that are present in DC casting (see Fig. 1a): namely, primary (relatively slow) cooling in the mold where the shell of the billet is formed; air-gap in the lower part of 1 73 the mold (very slow cooling) where a subsurface region of the billet is formed; secondary (very fast) cooling where the interior of the billet is formed; and downstream cooling where the solidification of the billet is finalized. b a Fig. 1 (a) Different zones in the billet sump and different regimes of cooling in DC casting [5]; (b) variation of grain size across the 200-mm billet diameter in dependence on casting speed for an Al–4% Cu alloy [6]. It is sometimes observed experimentally that the dendritic structure becomes finer in the center of the billet, though the cooling efficiency there should be less than in the immediate neighborhood. A thorough analysis of the available data, both experimental and numerical, shows that the accelerated solidification in the center of the billet has a reasonable physical explanation [4]. The formation of the solid phase produces latent heat of solidification and pumps additional thermal energy into the slurry zone, effectively slowing down the cooling. The central part of a casting is formed in the last stage of solidification when most of the latent heat has been already released and conducted out of the volume. Therefore, the cooling in the central-bottom part of the mushy zone is more efficient than in the slurry zone. In addition, the high solidification-front velocity (solidification rate) in the center of the billet may narrow the mushy zone as a result of a higher upward velocity of the solidus isotherm as compared to the liquidus velocity. It is essential that there is no strict correlation between the cooling rate measured by thermocouples embedded into the billet and the particular structure found in the specific location. It is especially the case when so-called duplex structures are observed with a mixture of fine-cell and coarse-cell dendritic grains. The formation of duplex structures is important for macrosegregation. Solidification under typical conditions encountered in most industrial processes, including DC casting, does not follow the equilibrium schedule with perfect partitioning and redistribution of alloying elements. As a result, nonequilibrium phases form through solidification reactions that should not have occurred under equilibrium conditions. This phenomenon is called microsegregation and, along with the accompanying processes of back diffusion and dendrite coarsening, have a profound effect on the amount of eutectics. The eutectic is the last liquid that solidifies and its volume fraction plays an essential role in the occurrence of hot tears. Furthermore, the accumulation of solutes at the solid–liquid interface that also happens due to the limited diffusion influences the formation of dendritic grain structure (fragmentation of dendrites and columnar-to-equiaxed transition) and constitutes one of the mechanisms of grain refining by so-called growth restriction [7]. The amount of (nonequilibrium) eutectics is one of the main structure parameters that affect the susceptibility of an alloy to hot tearing. Hot cracking would not occur if there were no eutectics (pure metal), or the amount of eutectics were sufficient to assure good feeding 2 74 conditions at the last stages of solidification. The presence of eutectics in the structure and the volume fraction of eutectics is a function of the chemical composition and solidification path (most of eutectics in wrought aluminum alloys is nonequilibrium) [8]. Our experimental and numerical studies show that the amount of eutectics is always lower in the center of the billet (ingot) where the hot tearing susceptibility is the highest [9]. The process parameters that facilitate hot tearing, e.g. a lower melt temperature and a lower alloying level, produce less eutectics. Hence, a higher melt temperature may hinder the development of hot cracks [10]. At the same time, it would result in general structure coarsening and affect the distribution of coarse-cell grains. The latter may have its effect on macrosegregation. The formation of structure and defects during DC casting is tightly linked to the geometry of the billet sump and the flow patterns that exist in the slurry and mushy parts of the sump. Transition region It is important to distinguish the characteristic regions in the sump that are characterized by different behavior (see Fig. 1a). The liquid part of the sump or the liquid (molten) bath is located above the liquidus isotherm. Here, thermal convection is the main driving force for melt flow, although in the vicinity of the liquidus the solute-enriched and cooler liquid can exit the transition region and affect the flow pattern. The liquid bath has very little variation in temperature during steady-state casting and the liquidus isotherm is nearly flat. The transition region or solidification region is bordered by the liquidus and (nonequilibrium) solidus isotherms. This region distinctly widens towards the center of the billet, and its dimensions are critical for the occurrence of casting defects and structure formation [2, 3, 4]. The transition region can be further divided into two parts. The upper part is called slurry and is confined between the liquidus and so-called coherency isotherm (25–40% solid). Within the slurry zone the solid is suspended in the liquid and the entire mixture is fluid. As the solidification progresses and the partitioning of solutes between the solid and the liquid phases occurs, the concentration-driven (or solutal) convection joins the thermal convection as a driving force for the melt flow. The solid phase in the slurry zone can move with the melt flow but is also affected by gravity so it follows quite complicated trajectories. This phenomenon frequently results in the duplex grain structures that have been already mentioned. The difference in the velocities between the solid (diluted) and liquid (enriched) phases, as well as between the cooler (enriched) and hotter (diluted) liquid flows is the fundamental reason for macrosegregation caused by the thermo-solutal convection and solidgrain transport. Further down the transition region, the so-called mushy zone lies between the coherency and the solidus isotherms. One of the main properties of the region close to the coherency isotherm and below it is the easiness of liquid penetration through it. This property is called permeability. High permeability enables the penetration of the thermo-solutal convective flow deeper into the slurry zone and even into the mushy zone and the transfer of the soluterich, cool liquid into the slurry zone, frequently deciding the macrosegregation pattern. On the other hand, permeability also determines the extent of melt flow within the mushy zone. The main driving force for this flow is the solidification shrinkage and thermal contraction. The larger extent of the shrinkage deeper inside the mushy zone and the metallostatic head of the liquid bath and the slurry zone create the pressure drop over the mushy zone that forces the liquid in the direction normal to the coherency isotherm (also called the solidification front). The shrinkage-driven flow of the solute-rich liquid is one of the mechanisms of inverse macrosegregation. Within the mushy zone the solid grains interact with each other, first by short-term contact, then by entangling, and finally by forming the continuous network. The last stage is marked by another characteristic isotherm – rigidity (85–95 % solid). Starting from this moment the stresses, mostly caused by uneven thermal contraction in different sections of the billet, can be transferred by the rigid mushy zone. The rigidity 3 75 isotherm can be measured experimentally [11, 12]. A combination between the developing stresses (and corresponding strains) and limited permeability creates conditions for the formation of hot cracks. Among casting parameters, the casting speed exerts the maximum and direct effect on the sump depth and the thickness of the transition (solidification) region [4]. The water-flow rate has a marginal effect, providing that the amount of water is adequate for the efficient cooling. The melt temperature does not affect much sump depth, but narrows the transition region by moving the liquidus isotherm down. In the transient stage of casting when the casting speed is changing the thermal inertia causes the delay in the sump development, which can explain the experimentally observed fact that the maximum of hot tearing susceptibility does not correlate necessarily to the highest casting speed in the transient casting regime, but rather to the deepest sump [4]. Macrosegregation Several mechanisms of macrosegregation act simultaneously producing sometimes very peculiar segregation patterns [4]. It is known that the thermo-solutal convection tends to bring the solute to the center of the billet, whereas the shrinkage-induced flow acts in the opposite direction. Floating grains dilute the portion of the billet where they accumulate. Deformation triggered by thermal contraction can act in different directions, depending on the sign of strain and the presence of the open surface. Seemingly controversial experimental observations can be adequately explained, assuming that different mechanisms contribute to a different extent. Among the casting parameters, the casting speed exerts the maximum effect on the extent of macrosegregation, Fig. 2a. This effect directly correlates with the changes in the geometry of the sump, in particular with the sump depth and the steepness of the solidification front, Fig. 2b. It is demonstrated both experimentally and numerically [2, 3, 4]. The centerline segregation increases with the casting speed. The shrinkage-induced flow is directly linked to the slope of the solidification front and, is therefore enhanced with the deepening of the sump, creating more inverse (negative) segregation. At the same time, a wider slurry zone and stronger penetration of the convective flow into the slurry region create more possibilities for floating grains to form and grow, further increasing the extent of negative macrosegregation. In this case, the contribution of the convective flow into the positive centerline segregation can be completely overtaken by other mechanisms. A higher melt temperature results in a higher macrosegregation close to the surface of the billet and no significant changes in the rest of the billet [10]. The size of the billet is yet another major factor in the formation of macrosegregation pattern. It is possible to obtain normal (positive centerline) macrosegregation virtually for any size of a billet or ingot, providing that it is possible to cast at low speeds [3, 13]. It is demonstrated experimentally and numerically that the transition from positive to negative centerline segregation occurs for a certain billet diameter on increasing the casting speed (see Fig. 2c). Generally the obtained dependence can be explained well based on the thickness of the transition region and the slope of the solidification front; therefore from the ratio between the thermo-solutal convection and the shrinkage-induced flow. The actual casting speeds that may result in positive or negligible macrosegregation are, unfortunately, much lower than those that are currently used in industry. However, there exists a possibility to enhance the contribution of thermo-solutal convection by external action, e.g. mechanical or electromagnetic stirring [3, 4]. Grain refining shifts the transition from positive to negative macrosegregation to higher casting speeds through the interplay of a lower coherency temperature, decreased permeability of the mushy zone and wider spread of floating grains [4, 13] (see Fig. 2c). 4 76 a b Fig. 2 Macrosegregation in DC casting: (a) effect of casting speed on macrosegregation of Cu in an Al–4% Cu alloy [6]; (b) flow patterns, characteristic zones and potential trajectories of floating crystals in the sump of a 200-mm billet; (c) effect of billet diameter and casting speed on the macrosegregation (positive centerline below the curves and negative – above the curves; dashed line – for grain refined alloys) [13]. c Hot tearing Further down the sump of the billet, closer to the (nonequilibrium) solidus the thermomechanical behavior of the semi-solid material becomes significant. Thermal contraction of the solid network saturated with liquid inside the billet bulk and the resistance to this contraction from the completely solid external part of the billet impose stress–strain conditions when the semi-solid material may fail and loose its integrity. This failure is called hot tearing or hot cracking. The fundamental reason for this defect is lack of liquid feeding that can compensate for the solidification shrinkage, and the formation of gaps (pores) that can develop into cracks under tension. Hence, the amount of liquid at the last stage of solidification (eutectics) and the permeability of the mushy zone play paramount role in the nucleation of hot cracks. On the other hand, mechanical properties of semi-solid alloys in the vicinity of the solidus and their dependence on temperature give an indication whether the material is able to withstand the thermal stress and can accommodate the thermal strain, or it will crack. The fracture can be prevented if the ductility or strength of semi-solid material is greater than the thermal strain or stress imposed on it [11]. And the fracture can be healed if the amount of liquid is sufficient to fill all the gaps created in the mush by deformation. Thermal strain that is accumulated in the solidification range of an alloy and the temperature when the contraction starts (rigidity temperature) are studied in detail [4, 11, 12]. It is shown experimentally, using a specially developed technique, that the temperature of contraction onset corresponds to rather high fractions of solid as illustrated in Fig. 3a. In fact, in most aluminum alloys the thermal contraction starts at a temperature of equilibrium solidus, or between the equilibrium and nonequilibrium solidus. The total thermal strain in the 5 77 (nonequilibrium) solidification range depends on the alloy system, and generally on the extent of the solidification range. The maximum of thermal contraction corresponds to alloy compositions with the maximum hot-tearing susceptibility. The temperature of contraction onset decreases with the structure refinement, caused both by a higher cooling rate and by grain refinement (see Fig. 3a). The thermal contraction is usually preceded by thermal expansion. The main reason for this pre-shrinkage expansion is gas evolution at the last stages of solidification. Grain refining facilitates thermal expansion. A greater expansion can compensate partially of completely for the thermal contraction, decreasing thereby the thermal strain exerted onto the mushy zone. One of the consequences of this phenomenon is the substitution of hot tears with porosity. Fig. 3 Hot tearing: (a) effect if alloy type and grain refinement on the thermal strain in the solidification range and the fraction of solid at the onset of contraction [14]; (b) different mechanisms of hot tearing acting at different stages of solidification [15]. Grain refining decreases the probability of hot cracking upon DC casting of aluminum alloys through the delay in the rigidity development and improved tensile strength and ductility of the semi-solid material. A number of theories and hypothesis has been suggested over the years for the mechanisms nucleation and propagation of hot cracks. Some of these mechanisms resulted in hot-tearing criteria, based on mechanical behavior of the alloy (critical strain, stress, or strain rate) or on its solidification characteristics (vulnerable solidification range, solidification time, feeding conditions, casting speed). Only those hot tearing criteria that take into account the dynamic nature of DC casting process, e.g. based on strain rate, or pressure variations, or casting speed; respond adequately to the change in hot tearing susceptibility with the change in process parameters. However, even these criteria can predict qualitatively only the probability of cracking, not the actual occurrence. A comprehensive model and a corresponding new hot tearing criterion should include nucleation and propagation of hot tears and connect these processes (i) to the microstructure evolution during solidification of the semi-solid material; (ii) to the macroscopic and microscopic thermo-mechanical situation in the mushy zone; and (iii) to the mechanical (or fracture-mechanical) properties of the mushy zone [15]. It is suggested that the mechanisms of hot crack nucleation and propagation can be different, depending on the composition of the alloy and the temperature range when the crack initiates and develops as demonstrated in Fig. 3b. Cold cracks Cold cracking phenomenon is the least studied, yet very important defect occurring during direct chill casting. The spontaneous nature of this defect makes its systematic study almost impossible. Computer simulation of thermomechanical behavior of an ingot during its 6 78 cooling after the end of solidification requires constitutive parameters of high-strength aluminum alloys in the as-cast condition, which are not readily available. The susceptibility to cracking is on one hand due to the segregation and precipitation of brittle intermetallics at grain boundaries and in interdendritic spaces, and on the other hand because of the development of high residual thermal stresses. Above the solidus, the low melting nonequilibrium eutectics provide potential sites for hot tearing. Further propagation of such cracks under tensile-stress fields that develop to some critical levels below the solidus may result in catastrophic failure of the ingot in the solid state; i.e. cold cracking. Other defects of certain size such as pores and inclusions can trigger cold cracking as well. What makes the material even more susceptible to cold cracking is the sever loss in ductility upon cooling after the end of solidification [3]. If the specific microstructure of the material in the as-cast condition provides potential crack sites for cold cracking, the stress development in the ingots during casting and further cooling is brought about by non-homogenous cooling conditions and certain thermo-physical properties of the material. For example, relatively higher coefficient of thermal expansion and lower thermal conductivity of some of 7xxx series alloys compared to other aluminum alloys result in steep temperature gradients and consequently high thermal stresses appear. In order to predict the cold cracking phenomenon in high-strength aluminum alloys, a true understanding of the residual thermal stress development during the casting is required. Cold cracking susceptibility was studied using the simulation results and casting trials on several billets under various conditions as illustrated in Fig. 4 [16]. The simulation results showed that as the casting speed increases, the critical crack size (according to Griffiths’ criterion) decreases leading to a higher failure probability of the billets. This was proven by casting trials. The critical crack sizes were validated upon experiments, where a 7 mm inclusion in the centre of the billet triggered the catastrophic failure (see Fig. 4b). b a Fig. 4 Cold cracking: (a) computer simulation of principle stress and critical crack size (CCS) distribution in a 200-mm 7xxx-series billet; (b) cold crack in a 200-mm billet triggered by an oxide inclusion [16]. Concluding remark This review on direct-chill casting of aluminum alloys demonstrates the complexity of mechanisms involved in the formation of structure, macrosegregation and hot tearing. It is a strong belief of the author that the control over structure formation and elimination of casting 7 79 defects can be only achieved when the contributions of all the involved mechanisms and the ratio of these contributions are taken into account. Acknowledgements This paper presents an overview based on the results obtained under supervision of the author and Prof. L. Katgerman with participation of Drs. Suyitno, Q. Du, R. Nadella, M. Lalpoor, V.I. Savran and A. Stangeland. Their contribution is greatly appreciated. References 1. W. Roth, “Ueber die Abkühlung des Stranges bein ‘Wasserguß’”, Aluminium, 25 (1943) 283–291. 2. V.I. Dobatkin, Continuous Casting and Casting Properties of Alloys (Moscow: Oborongiz, 1948), 154 p. 3. V.A. Livanov, R.M. Gabidullin, and V.S. Shepilov, Continuous Casting of Aluminum Alloys (Moscow: Metallurgiya, 1977), 168 p. 4. D.G. Eskin, Physical Metallurgy of Direct Chill Casting of Aluminum Alloys. (Boca Raton, CA: CRC Press, 2008), 301 p. 5. J.F. Grandfield, D.G. Eskin, and I.F. Bainbridge. Direct Chill Casting of Light Alloys: Science and Technology. Hoboken: John Wiley & Sons, 2013, 412 p. 6. D.G. Eskin et al., Structure formation and macrosegregation under different process conditions during DC casting, Materials Science and Engineering A, 384 (2004) 232–244. 7. M.A. Easton and D.H. StJohn. A model of grain refinement incorporating alloy constitution and potency of heterogeneous nucleant particles, Acta Materialia, 49 (2001) 1867–1878. 8. I.I. Novikov and V.S. Zolotorevsky, Dendritic Segregation in Alloys (Moscow: Nauka, 1966), 44–109. 9. Suyitno et al., Effects of alloy composition and casting speed on structure formation and hot tearing during DC casting of Al–Cu alloys,Metallurgical and Materials Transactions A, 35A (2004) 3551–3561. 10. D.G. Eskin, V.I. Savran, and L. Katgerman, Effects of melt temperature and casting speed on the structure and defect formation during direct-chill casting of an Al–Cu alloy, Metallurgical and Materials Transactions A, 36A (2005) 1965–1976. 11. I.I. Novikov, Hot Shortness of Non-Ferrous Metals and Alloys (Moscow: Nauka, 1966), 188–196. 12. D.G. Eskin et al., Contraction of aluminum alloys during and after solidification, Metallurgical and Materials Transactions A, 35A (2004) 1325–1335. 13. D.G. Eskin, Q. Du, and L. Katgerman, Scale rules for macrosegregation during directchill casting of aluminum alloys, Metallurgical and Materials Transactions A, 39A (2008) 1206–1212. 14. A. Stangeland, A. Mo, and D.G. Eskin, Thermal strain in the mushy zone for aluminum alloys, Metallurgical and Materials Transactions A, 37A (2006) 2219–2229. 15. D.G. Eskin and L. Katgerman, A quest for a new hot tearing criterion, Metallurgical and Materials Transactions A, 38A (2007) 1511–1519. 16. M. Lalpoor et al., Cold cracking in DC-cast high strength aluminum alloy ingots: An intrinsic problem intensified by casting process parameters, Materials Science and Engineering A, 528 (2011) 2831–2842. 8 80