Materials & Design 258 (2025) 114619 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Materials & Design journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/matdes Folate-modified nanodelivery platform loaded with triptolide for targeted synergistic photothermal therapy of macrophages to alleviate rheumatoid arthritis Zhenghua Sun a,b,1, Xinzhou Peng b,1, Liang Yang a,1, Weixuan Liu c , Wenjun Liu a , Xinyuan Du d , Jiajia Zhuo b, Bingbo Bao a,* , Chao Zhou a,* , Hao Xiong a,* a Department of Orthopedics, Shanghai Sixth People’s Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200233, China Department of Joint Surgery and Sports Medicine, Zhongshan Hospital of Xiamen University, School of Medicine, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian 361000, China c Department of Sports Medicine, Peking University Shenzhen Hospital, Shenzhen Peking University-The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology Medical Center, Shenzhen 518036, China d Eye Institute of Xiamen University, School of Medicine, Xiamen University, National Institute for Data Science in Health and Medicine, Xiamen University, Xiamen University affiliated Xiamen Eye Center, Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology and Visual Science, Fujian Engineering and Research Center of Eye Regenerative Medicine, Xiamen, Fujian 361005, China b A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T Keywords: Triptolide Macrophages Rheumatoid arthritis Photothermal therapy Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is treated mainly with oral medication. However, the use of disease-modifying anti­ rheumatic drugs (DMARDs) through the oral route is restricted because of low bioavailability, poor absorption, hepatotoxicity and serious adverse effects, requiring the investigation of alternative delivery methods. Targeted nanodelivery system loaded with Triptolide (TPL) for intra-articular injection presents a promising solution, avoiding the toxic side effects arising from the nonspecific effects of free drug molecules. Nevertheless, current nanodelivery systems typically lack extended therapeutic periods and involve complex synthesis processes. Furthermore, a single treatment approach often fails to yield remarkable outcomes. Herein, we develop a multifunctional drug delivery system (DDS) consists of gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) and hydroxyapatite (HAP) mesoporous hollow nanoparticles loaded with folic acid (FA) and TPL, called FA-TPL@HAP@AuNPs (FA-THA). These nanoparticles use HAP as a base, encapsulate AuNPs for photothermal therapy (PTT), and are coated with FA and TPL on their surface. The mesoporous structure of the HAP nanoparticles acts as a storage space for TPL, while the FA component ensures that the DDS selectively targets inflamed joint areas to kill inflammatory cell through PTT. HAP mesoporous hollow microspheres ensure good biocompatibility and extend drug sustained release. Owing to its optimized TPL release behavior and significant PTT, FA-THA exhibits potent antiinflammatory effects in adjuvant-induced arthritis (AIA) rats following intra-articular injection. The FA-THA system, a multifaceted drug delivery platform, exhibited high biocompatibility and therapeutic outcomes, making it become a promising candidate for the treatment of RA. Abbreviations: AI, Articular index; AIA, Adjuvant-induced arthritis; ALT, Alanine aminotransferase; ANOVA, Analysis of variance; AST, Aspartate aminotrans­ ferase; AuNPs, Gold nanoparticles; BCA, Bicinchoninic acid; BUN, Blood urea nitrogen; BV/TV, Bone volume fraction; CFA, Complete Freund’s adjuvant; Cr, Creatinine; DAPI, 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole; DDS, Drug delivery system; DMARDs, Disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs; ELISA, Enzyme-linked immuno­ sorbent assay; ELVIS, Extravasation through Leaky Vasculature and subsequent Inflammatory cell-mediated Sequestration; FA, Folic acid; FA-THA, FA-TPL@HA­ P@AuNPs; FTIR, Fourier transform infrared; H&E, Hematoxylin and eosin; HAP, Hydroxyapatite; HAP-HS, HAP mesoporous hollow microsphere; HRP, Horseradish peroxidase; IL-6, Interleukin-6; NIR, Near-infrared; PTT, Photothermal therapy; QPCR, Quantitative real-time PCR; RA, Rheumatoid arthritis; SD, Standard deviation; SDS-PAGE, Sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis; Tb.Th, Trabecular bone thickness; TEM, Transmission electron microscopy; THA, TPL@HAP@AuNPs; TNF-α, Tumor necrosis factor-α; TPL, Triptolide; WB, Western blotting; XRD, X-ray diffraction; IVIS, In Vivo Image System. * Corresponding authors. E-mail addresses: bingbobao@163.com (B. Bao), zh2c0211@163.com (C. Zhou), 15870679103@163.com (H. Xiong). 1 These authors equally contributed to this work. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matdes.2025.114619 Received 13 March 2025; Received in revised form 14 August 2025; Accepted 19 August 2025 Available online 20 August 2025 0264-1275/© 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). Z. Sun et al. Materials & Design 258 (2025) 114619 due to malfunctioning of the immune system, potentially linked to an exaggerated response from neutrophils, macrophages, lymphocytes, and dendritic cells [1–5]. RA is characterized by an influx of these cells in inflamed joints, along with the proliferation of fibroblast-like synovial cells in the joint lining. The dysregulated immune milieu in individuals with RA fosters metabolic shifts, modifies the polarization of macro­ phages, disturbs the equilibrium between the M1 and M2 macrophage subsets, and exacerbates inflammatory responses in tissues [6]. Controllable regulation on macrophage polarization and its function 1. Introduction Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) refers to a prevalent systemic and auto­ immune chronic inflammatory condition that predominantly influences the synovial joints. If left unchecked, RA can cause joint deformities, damage to bone and cartilage, and eventual loss of joint function. In severe cases, it may cause different degrees of disability, significantly deteriorating a patient’s quality of life. RA can affect individuals of any age, with a higher incidence among women than men. The disease arises Fig. 1. Schematic illustration of the FA-modified nanodelivery system loaded with TPL to treat RA. 2 Z. Sun et al. Materials & Design 258 (2025) 114619 may offer an alternative for targeted therapy on RA Fig. 1. Tripterygium wilfordii is a vital traditional Chinese medicine adopted for treating RA and has been used for centuries. Triptolide (TPL), an extract from T. wilfordii, is extensively applied as a first-line anti-RA therapy in China [7–9]. Over the past few decades, several clinical studies involving over a thousand participants diagnosed with condi­ tions such as RA, ankylosing spondylitis, and chronic nephrotic syn­ drome have documented significant therapeutic success with the use of TPL [10]. TPL regulates macrophages in rheumatoid arthritis through several mechanisms[11–13]. First, it can suppress macrophage polari­ zation towards the pro-inflammatory M1 phenotype by acting on the JAK1/2-STAT1/5 pathway[14]. Then, TPL promotes macrophage po­ larization towards the anti-inflammatory M2 phenotype through the cGAS-STING and JAK1/3-STAT6 pathways [15]. Additionally, TPL promotes the apoptosis of M1 macrophages via the MAPK pathway, reducing the number of pro-inflammatory macrophages and alleviating inflammation[16]. TPL could also inhibit monocyte/macrophage expression of CD80 and CD86, thereby reducing co-stimulatory signals for T cells activation and suppressing the activation of pathogenic T cells. Through these actions on macrophages, TPL can regulate the balance of pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory macrophages and their secreted factors, inhibit the inflammatory response and immune abnormalities in rheumatoid arthritis, and alleviate joint inflammation and damage. TPL preparations are mainly administered orally, but it is prone to toxic side effects. Moreover, owing to the poor solubility of TPL in water, it is difficult to dissolve TPL in the gastrointestinal tract, resulting in low bioavailability [17,18]. Recently, various drug delivery systems (DDS) have been widely studied for their therapeutic applica­ tions using nanoparticles. Using this technology, it is possible to pro­ mote the sustained release of active substances, reduce side effects, decrease the required dosage, and enhance therapeutic activity [19]. Conventional drugs administered through systemic or intra-articular routes have lower accumulation and retention rates in articular carti­ lage, leading to dose-limiting toxicity and lower efficacy. Thus, better drug delivery measures, especially those involving targeted modifica­ tion techniques, need to be developed [20]. Because of aberrant in­ flammatory and vascular cell infiltration in RA joints, vascular permeability can increase significantly; as a result, nanocarriers can passively accumulate via ELVIS effect (Extravasation through Leaky Vasculature and subsequent Inflammatory cell-mediated Sequestration) [21–23]. Nanotechnology offers a promising drug-loading strategy by enhancing drug delivery with prolonged circulation, sustained release, and targeted action, which can decrease systemic side effects [24]. However, the current drug delivery systems still remain inadequate to cover as many RA treatment cycles as possible [25,26]. Additionally, there are issues such as the limited efficacy of single therapy, complex synthesis, biocompatibility, and degradability [27–29]. Consequently, there is a significant need for a nanodelivery system that exhibits exceptional biocompatibility, facilitates synergistic therapy, and ach­ ieves long-term, targeted drug release for the treatment of RA. Photothermal therapy (PTT) is an emerging technique for treating RA that uses electromagnetic radiation to increase tissue temperature and destroy abnormal tissue[30–32]. PTT works by locally enhancing tissue temperature through the photoexcitation of photosensitizers using microwaves, radiofrequencies, near-infrared (NIR), or visible light exposure[33]. The efficiency of PTT depends on various factors, including the size, shape, composition, surface plasmon resonance (SPR) capacity, and photostability of the nanomaterials used[34]. The nano­ materials can accumulate selectively in inflamed areas, achieve targeted therapy, and enhance the release of chemotherapeutic agents after NIR irradiation. The main advantages of PTT for RA treatment include sitedirected therapy, photo-responsive drug release, and the inhibition of proinflammatory biomarkers like tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) and interleukin-1β (IL-1β). However, challenges such as ensuring the biocompatibility and safety of nanomaterials, studying their long-term efficacy and stability, and translating PTT from preclinical research to clinical applications still need to be addressed [35,36] Overall, PTT of­ fers a promising alternative approach to current RA treatment modal­ ities and has the potential to improve the quality of life for RA patients while reducing the adverse effects associated with chemotherapeutic drugs. Hydroxyapatite (HAP; Ca10(PO4)6(OH)2), similar to natural bone components, has excellent biological activity and biocompatibility, and is commonly used as a substitute for bone repair processes. Therefore, HAP can be applied as a polymeric nanocarrier system for treating RA [37]. The folic acid (FA) receptor is a membrane glycoprotein linked to glycerophosphoinositol. FA receptors are widely present in various or­ gans of humans, and when inflammatory reactions occur, activated macrophages can produce more folate receptors [38]. Additionally, activated macrophages can excessively express various proinflammatory factors, like IL-1β, TNF-α, and interleukin-6 (IL-6), inducing synovitis and synovial hyperplasia [25]. Therefore, the accumulation of activated macrophages at the site of arthritis enables the use of FA-conjugated medications to selectively target such inflammatory sites [39]. In FAtargeted therapy, inflammatory cells are selectively attacked, with no damage to normal macrophages [40]. Thus, activated macrophages are potential anti-RA therapeutic targets [41–44]. Owing to their ultrafine size, high biocompatibility, high stability, and diverse capabilities, AuNPs are considered to be suitable candidates for anti-RA treatment [45]. They can NIR energy into thermal energy through localized surface plasmon resonance [46,47]. When light is incident on the surface of nanomaterials, the nanoparticles exhibit strong absorption of photon energy, resulting in localized surface plasmon resonance effects. Therefore, owing to their high absorption-to-scattering ratio and effi­ cient photothermal conversion, AuNPs can serve as photothermal agents [48]. We synthesized HAP mesoporous hollow microspheres using HAP as the substrate, encapsulating AuNPs capable of PTT, and loading FA and TPL onto the surface of HAP mesoporous hollow microspheres to construct an FA-THA DDS. The mesoporous structure of these HAP mi­ crospheres acts as a storage compartment for TPL, while the DDS uses the targeting ability of FA to selectively reach inflamed joint areas. This approach allows the FA-THA system to selectively target and eliminate inflammatory cells without damaging healthy macrophages, effectively treating RA. 2. Materials and methods 2.1. Materials The applied materials were acquired from various suppliers. The chemical mixture included calcium stearate (C805417), oleic acid (O815203), ethanol (E809061), trisodium citrate (C824131), folic acid (F809516), and dimethyl sulfoxide (D806647), which were purchased from Shanghai McLean Biochemical Technology Co., Ltd. Toluene (C0430110223) was obtained from Nanjing Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. Sodium phosphate dodecahydrate (71649) was purchased from Merck KGaA. Tetrachloroauric acid (203386) and sodium borohydride (247677) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich (Shanghai) Trading Co., Ltd. Triptolide (B20709) was purchased from Shanghai Yuanye Biotechnology Co., Ltd. Fluorescein FITC (HY-66019) was purchased from American MedChemExpress Biotechnology Co., Ltd. High-glucose Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM, 11965092), fetal bovine serum (FBS, 10099), and penicillin–streptomycin (10378016) were purchased from Gibco (USA). IL-1β (ab255730), IL-6 (ab234570), and TNF-α (ab236712) ELISA kits and Arg1 (ab91279) and iNOS (ab15323) antibodies were purchased from Abcam (USA). Collagen type II anti­ bodies (AF0135) were purchased from Jiangsu Affinity Bioscience Co., Ltd. 3 Z. Sun et al. Materials & Design 258 (2025) 114619 2.2. Preparation of HAP-HS scanning was performed in the range of 10–80◦ . The Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) results were acquired with an FTIR spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA), in which freezedried HAP@AuNPs, FA-HAP@AuNPs, and FA-THA powders were placed in agate mortars, and then an appropriate amount of high-purity KBr powder was added, ground and mixed evenly. Finally, an appro­ priate amount of evenly mixed powder was pressed into tablets in a lozenge former. The scanning range was set to 4000 cm− 1 to 400 cm− 1 for testing. Then, the image was analyzed. UV–Vis spectroscopy was carried out with a UV–Vis spectropho­ tometer (Agilent Technologies Inc.) in order to measure the amount of TPL adsorbed on the HAP@AuNP nanospheres. The release experiment was performed with PBS (pH 7.4). A total of 20 mg of THA from drugloaded nanospheres was added to 100 mL of PBS. Subsequently, 2 mL of solution was collected and centrifuged at each selected time, the TPL concentration of the supernatant was measured via UV–Vis spectroscopy at 218 nm, and the release curve was plotted as the relative percentage of TPL release versus time. 2 mL of PBS was added to maintain volume after each sample taking out [49]. An 808 nm laser at a power of 1 W/cm2 was applied to determine the photothermal properties of the nanospheres. After irradiation with 500 µg/mL THA nanospheres for 5 min, the laser was turned off and the mixture was cooled for 5 min; this process was repeated for five cycles. In addition, the temperature was recorded. First, 0.064 g of calcium stearate was placed in a three-necked flask. Next, 2 mL of oleic acid and 20 mL of toluene were supplemented to the flask. The flask was subsequently immersed in a 90 ◦ C oil bath and stirred continuously until the calcium stearate dissolved entirely, yielding a clear solution. Following dissolution, the solution was allowed to return to ambient temperature with ongoing stirring. Sub­ sequently, 20 mL of a solution containing 0.023 g of sodium phosphate dodecahydrate was added incrementally to the flask, ensuring thorough mixing. Subsequently, the temperature was increased to 60◦ C, and this setting was maintained for 8 h to facilitate this reaction. After the re­ action stopped, the mixture was cooled to room temperature. After cooling, the mixture was left undisturbed for 24 h at room temperature. After aging, the solution was carefully decanted, and the product was precipitated with ethanol. The precipitated material was centrifuged and rinsed with ethanol until all residual impurities were eliminated. Finally, the washed precipitate was freeze-dried to obtain HAP meso­ porous hollow microsphere (HAP-HS) powder. 2.3. Preparation of AuNPs To synthesize AuNPs, 100 mM tetrachloroauric acid solution (0.5 mL) was added to 100 mM trisodium citrate solution (0.5 mL) in 20 mL of ultrapure water at room temperature. Subsequently, a fresh solution of 0.1 M sodium borohydride (0.6 mL) was supplemented, and the mixture was stirred for 1 min to yield the AuNPs. 2.6. Flow cytometry analysis First, M0 macrophages were incubated for 24 h in a complete me­ dium which contained 100 ng/mL LPS for M1 macrophage induction. These M1 macrophages were then plated at 2 × 105 cells/well in six-well plates before they were allowed to adhere overnight. FA-THA-FITC and THA-FITC were subsequently introduced into complete DMEM at 80 µg/ mL. This medium, containing the respective nanospheres, was cocul­ tured with M1 macrophages for 12 h. After washing three times with serum-free medium, the cells were transferred to flow cytometry tubes. In each tube, 1 mL of PBS was added for resuspension. These tubes were centrifuged at 800 rpm for 5 min. After discarding the supernatant, the contents of the tubes were rinsed three times. Finally, flow cytometry was performed to analyze the cells. 2.4. Preparation of FA-THA To synthesize hollow-sphere HAP loaded with TPL and AuNPs (TPL@HAP@AuNPs, THA), 0.064 g of calcium stearate was placed in a three-necked flask. Next, 2 mL of oleic acid and 20 mL of toluene were added to the flask. The mixture was heated in an oil bath at 90 ◦ C while stirring until the contents were fully dissolved, yielding a clear solution, which was subsequently cooled to ambient temperature while the stir­ ring process was maintained. A 20 mL solution prepared with 0.023 g of sodium phosphate dodecahydrate was added. Next, 1 mL of a 0.001 M TPL solution and 1 mL of the synthesized AuNP solution were intro­ duced. The mixture was thoroughly mixed and heated to 60 ◦ C for 8 h. Once the reaction stopped, the mixture was cooled to ambient temper­ ature and allowed to age for 24 h. After aging, the reaction mixture was carefully removed, and the mixture was precipitated with ethanol. The mixture was subsequently centrifuged, and the precipitate was rinsed until all residual impurities were eliminated. To obtain the final product, the washed precipitate was freeze-dried to form a powder of the desired THA composite. First, 50 mg of HAP@AuNPs and the THA powder were weighed and dispersed in 10 mL of DMSO, followed by adding 20 mg of FA, which was fully dissolved and mixed to obtain FA-HAP@AuNPs and FA-THA. Finally, the contents were freeze-dried to obtain FAHAP@AuNPs and FA-THA powders. 2.7. Cell proliferation A CCK-8 assay was used for assessing the cytotoxicity of FA-THA and THA and the PTT effects of FA-THA on M1 macrophages. RAW 264.7 cells were initially maintained in a complete medium including 100 ng/ mL LPS for 24 h for M1 macrophage induction. M1 macrophages were plated in 96-well plates, followed by incubation for 48 h. A complete DMEM medium containing different concentrations of FA-THA and THA was added to replace the original medium, and the mixture was incu­ bated for another 24 h. Next, 100 µL of CCK-8 solution was added to each well. The plate was subject to incubation for 2 h, after which absorbance was measured at 450 nm with a microplate reader. For the PTT experiments, M1 macrophages were inoculated in 96well plates for 24 h. Subsequently, DMEM containing FA-THA was added to replace the original medium, and the cells were irradiated with an 808 nm laser for 1, 2, 3, 4, or 5 min. After 100 µL of CCK-8 reagent was added to each well, the plate was incubated for 2 h, and a microplate reader was adopted for measuring the absorbance at 450 nm. 2.5. Characterization of FA-THA Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) experiments were con­ ducted with a JEOL JEM-F200 microscope at an operating voltage of 200 kV (Cs of 1.0 mm, Cc of 1.1 mm for TEM, and spot resolution of 1.9 Å). Under low-dose conditions, the GATAN OneView IS camera (4096 × 4096 pixels) was used to record images. X-ray diffraction (XRD) was performed with a D8 Discover X-ray diffractometer manufactured by Bruker Germany to characterize the phase and structure of the prepared HAP-HS hollow spheres and HAP@AuNP nanospheres. An appropriate amount of sample powder was placed in the glass groove, the powder was compacted and flattened, and the glass piece was placed on the sample stage of XRD for detection. The instrument parameters were as follows: Cu target, Kα radiation (40 kV, 30 mA, λ = 0.15418 nm), and 2.8. Western blotting (WB) and quantitative real-time PCR (QPCR) Cells were lysed with RIPA lysis buffer including protease/phos­ phatase inhibitors. The total protein concentration in the lysates was measured with a bicinchoninic acid (BCA) kit. After the proteins were separated through sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electro­ phoresis (SDS-PAGE), they were transferred onto polyvinylidene 4 Z. Sun et al. Materials & Design 258 (2025) 114619 fluoride membranes. After blocking for 1 h with 5 % bovine serum al­ bumin in Tris-buffered saline which contained 0.1 % Tween 20 at ambient temperature, the membranes were subject to incubation with primary antibodies in a blocking solution at 4 ◦ C overnight following specific protocols. Next, the corresponding horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated secondary antibodies were added, and the mem­ branes were incubated for 1 h at ambient temperature. A total RNA isolation kit was used for extracting total RNA following specific pro­ tocols. A LightCycler96 system was adopted for performing real-time PCR. The comparative ΔCT approach was employed to analyze rela­ tive gene expression, with GAPDH serving as the internal reference. articular index (AI) score was used to evaluate clinical joint symptoms. 2.9. Immunofluorescence analysis After fixation, decalcification, and dehydration, the samples were embedded in paraffin and cut into sections (4 µm thick) for hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) and safranin O-fast green staining following specific protocols. Damage to the cartilage was evaluated using the Mankin score, whereas synovial inflammation was assessed by the histopatho­ logical score. Additionally, type II collagen immunohistochemistry ex­ aminations were conducted on these sections. The dewaxed sections underwent primary antibody staining for immunohistochemistry anal­ ysis, followed by secondary antibody and DAPI staining. 2.12. Micro-CT imaging For the in vivo assays, the animals were euthanized on day 30, and the hind limbs were harvested and immersed in 10 % formalin for 48h. In addition, a high-resolution micro-CT scanner (Skyscan 1176, Version 1.1, Bruker, Kontich, Belgium) was used for sample analysis at 85 kV and an isometric resolution of 18 mm. 2.13. Histological evaluation To prepare RAW 264.7 cells, sterile PBS was added to wash the cells, after which the cells were fixed with paraformaldehyde for 15 min at ambient temperature. Following another 15 min of permeabilization with 0.2 % Triton X-100 at ambient temperature, the cells were blocked with 5 % goat serum at ambient temperature for 1h. Later, the cells were subject to incubation overnight with primary antibodies at 4 ◦ C, fol­ lowed by incubation with secondary antibodies and staining with 4′,6diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI). 2.14. IVIS spectrum 2.10. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and serum tests in rats In the rat AIA model, on day 0 (when arthritis is confirmed), Cy5modified FA-THA nanoparticles and Cy5-modified THA nanoparticles are injected into the knee joint. The injection volume is optimized to ensure localized delivery. On days 3 and 7 post-injection, rats are anesthetized with isoflurane and imaged using a small animal in vivo imaging system, with settings adjusted for Cy5 fluorescence (excitation around 650 nm, emission around 690 nm). The system captures fluo­ rescence signals from the knee joint area, and images are analyzed using specialized software to measure fluorescence intensity in the region of interest. To assess the IL-1β, TNF-α, IL-6, IL-10, and TGF-β concentrations in the supernatants of RAW 264.7 cells, ELISA was conducted. After 12 h of treatment with PBS, TPL, or FA-THA, the culture medium was collected and explored using a mouse ELISA kit following specific protocols. The absorbance values were measured at 450 nm with a microplate reader. For the RA knees, the weights of the femur parts were taken for liquid nitrogen grinding and homogenization in PBS (1 mL) using an electric homogenizer. Following 15 min of centrifugation at 10,000 × g and 4 ◦ C, the level of expression of IL-1β, TNF-α, and IL-6 in the supernatants was measured using ELISA kits following the manufacturer’s protocol. Blood was collected from the rats using the infraorbital plexus approach, and the serum was extracted via centrifugation. Then, the serum creatinine (Cr) and blood urea nitrogen (BUN) contents, as well as alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) activities, were measured with standardized autoanalyzer techniques. 2.15. Statistical analysis The data are indicated as the mean ± standard deviation (SD). The Student’s t-test and one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to determine the differences between and among groups, respectively. All differences among and between groups represented statistical signifi­ cance at P < 0.05. 2.11. Animal model 3. Results All experimental animal protocols were approved by the Animal Welfare Ethics Committee of Shanghai Sixth People’s Hospital and the Animal Laboratory of Shanghai Sixth People’s Hospital (No: DWLL20230392). Male Sprague-Dawley rats (200–250 g) were acquired from Shanghai Bikai Keyi Biotechnology Co., Ltd. to conduct animal experi­ ments (animal production license: SCXK (Shanghai 2018–0006). Male SD rats (200–250 g, 12 weeks old) were injected with complete Freund’s adjuvant (CFA) (0.5 mL) at the tail base to establish an AIA model [50]. On the 10th day after induction via injection, rats showed inflammatory swelling from the toes to the ankles, and the rats showed prominent impairments in activity. When redness and swelling of the forelimbs, tail, and ears were found simultaneously, we considered that the model was established. Then, the animals were randomized into five treatment groups: PBS, TPL (1 mg/kg), THA (1 mg/kg), FA-THA (1 mg/kg), and FA-THA (1 mg/kg) + NIR. Additionally, a sham group consisting of normal rats was included, resulting in six groups (n = 6 rats/group). The treatment period lasted 30 days, with injections into the knee joint cavity every three days. For the NIR group, an 808 nm laser was used to the knee joint at a power density of 1 W/cm2 for 5 min following each injection. On the 30th day, the rats were euthanized via CO2 inhalation, and samples were collected for subsequent analysis. Additionally, redness and swelling of the paws were observed. Meanwhile, the 3.1. FA-THA synthesis and characterization The TEM images indicated that the synthesized HAP-HS mesoporous hollow beads had a uniform size and a hollow structure (Fig. 2A (a)). The magnified view revealed a hollow sphere diameter of about 26.55 nm, a hollow diameter of approximately 15.65 nm, and a spherical shell thickness of about 5.45 nm. Fig. 2A (b) depicts the synthesized AuNPs with a consistent particle size distribution, and the electron diffraction pattern in the upper right corner confirms the characteristic diffraction points indicative of Au. Fig. 2A (c) presents the HAP@AuNPs composite, demonstrating that the AuNPs were encapsulated within the HAP mes­ oporous hollow microspheres, with a uniform particle size distribution. The magnified image indicates that the AuNPs are about 9.56 nm in size. Fig. 2G displays a more concentrated particle size distribution ranging from 5 to 25 nm, with most of the particles falling between 9 and 11 nm. A closer examination of the AuNPs showed that the lattice fringes are prominent, with a lattice spacing of 3.4 Å, consistent with the [0001] crystal plane of Au. The electron diffraction spectrum in the upper right inset further supports the encapsulation of AuNPs within the hollow spheres, confirming the loading of AuNPs by HAP-HS. The FTIR spectra of HAP@AuNPs, FA-HAP@AuNPs, and FA-THA 5 Z. Sun et al. Materials & Design 258 (2025) 114619 Fig. 2. Characterization of FA-THA. (A) TEM image of (a) HAP-HS, (b) AuNPs, and (c) HAP@AuNPs. (B) FA-THA (80 µg/mL; 808 nm, 1 W/cm2) for thermal imaging under laser illumination. (C) Heating heatmap of nanoparticles at different concentrations under laser irradiation. (D) Photothermal stability of FA-THA after five heating–cooling cycles. (E) FTIR spectra of HAP@AuNPs, FA-HAP@AuNPs, and FA-THA.XRD patterns of HAP-HS and HAP@AuNPs. (F) FA-THA sustained the release of TPL in vitro. (G) Particle size analysis of HAP@AuNPs. (H) XRD patterns of HAP-HS and HAP@AuNPs. demonstrated the successful modification of FA and TPL on the surface of FA-THA (Fig. 2E). In the FTIR analysis of the FA-THA composite, the functional groups and structural assignments for each wavenumber are as follows: the peak at 3401 cm–1 is attributed to O-H stretching vibra­ tions from the structural hydroxyl groups in HAP and the phenolic hy­ droxyl groups in FA or TPL. The peaks at 2916 cm–1 and 2848 cm–1 correspond to the asymmetric and symmetric stretching vibrations of aliphatic C-H, primarily from the methyl groups in FA or TPL. The peak at 1568 cm–1 is assigned to the antisymmetric stretching vibration of carboxylate (–COO–), while the peak at 1408 cm–1 is due to the sym­ metric stretching vibration of –COO–. The peaks at 1112 cm–1 and 1023 cm–1 are attributed to the splitting peaks of the asymmetric stretching vibrations of phosphate (PO3– 4 ), mainly from the lattice vibrations of P-O bonds in HAP. The peak at 557 cm–1 corresponds to the bending vi­ bration of PO3– 4 . In the FTIR analysis of the FA-THA composite, the peak at 3256 cm–1 is attributed to the stretching vibration of O-H, mainly from the struc­ tural hydroxyl groups in HAP and the phenolic hydroxyl groups in FA or TPL. The peaks at 2916 cm–1 and 2848 cm–1 correspond to the asym­ metric and symmetric stretching vibrations of aliphatic C-H, primarily from the methyl groups in FA or TPL. The peak at 1694 cm–1 is assigned to the stretching vibration of the C=O bond in free carboxyl groups (–COOH). The peak at 1605 cm–1 corresponds to the antisymmetric stretching vibration of –COO–, and the peak at 1505 cm–1 is attributed to the skeletal vibrations of aromatic C=C/C=N. The peak at 1408 cm–1 is assigned to the symmetric stretching vibration of –COO–, while the peak at 1296 cm–1 corresponds to the stretching vibration of C-N. The peaks at 1112 cm–1 and 1023 cm–1 are attributed to the splitting peaks of the asymmetric stretching vibrations of PO3– 4 , mainly from the lattice vi­ brations of P-O bonds in HAP. The peak at 945 cm–1 is assigned to the stretching vibration of hydroxylphosphate (P-OH), and the peak at 762 cm–1 corresponds to the out-of-plane bending vibration of aromatic C-H. The peak at 557 cm–1 is attributed to the bending vibration of PO3– 4 . The new characteristic peaks in the FA-THA spectrum at 1694 cm–1 (free –COOH), 1505 cm–1 (aromatic ring), 1296 cm–1 (C-N), 945 cm–1 (POH), and 762 cm–1 (aromatic C-H bending) reflect the functional groups of FA and TPL, effectively confirming the successful loading of organic molecules onto the HAP@AuNPs substrate. The shift in the O-H peak (3401 → 3256 cm–1) indicates the formation of a stronger hydrogen bonding network after complexation. The emergence of characteristic peaks for aromatic structures (1505 cm–1 and 762 cm–1) in the ternary composite provides evidence for the introduction of FA/TPL aromatic ring structures. The UV spectrophotometric absorption pattern of FA-THA in phosphate-buffered saline suggested that the concentration of TPL in the solution increased over time and continued to increase, demonstrating that TPL can be continuously released into the body fluid environment for up to 10,000 min (Fig. 2F). This finding confirmed the excellent sustained release properties of FA-THA. Compared to the standard XRD patterns for HAP (PDF#09–0432) and Au (PDF#65–2870), the HAP@AuNP curve exhibited a greater number of Au characteristic peaks (Fig. 2H). This observation confirmed the successful incorporation of AuNPs into HAP. When irradiated with an 808 nm laser and monitored using a thermal imaging camera, the results showed that saline alone does not undergo laser-induced thermal reactions. However, when FA-THA at 80 µg/mL was introduced into saline, the temperature significantly increased within 5 min, peaking at about 74.5 ℃ (Fig. 2B). The photothermal performance was positively correlated with the concentration, and the 80 µg/mL sample demonstrated the highest efficiency. Additionally, 20 µg/mL and 40 µg/mL nanospheres also achieved temperatures exceeding 40 ◦ C after 5 min of NIR irradiation at 808 nm (Fig. 2C). To further investigate the photoperiodic stability and heat conduction of FA-THA, the suspensions were subjected to five irradiation cycles. The rapid heating and cooling cycles indicated the stability and reproduc­ ibility of the photothermal conversion of FA-THA (Fig. 2D). The 6 Z. Sun et al. Materials & Design 258 (2025) 114619 photothermal conversion efficiency fitting curve for FA-THA shows a strong linear relationship between time and − lnθ, with an R2 value of 0.985 (Fig. S2). This indicates that the temperature change over time is highly predictable and follows a consistent pattern. The time constant τ is 195.74 s, suggesting the time it takes for the system to reach approximately 63 % of its temperature change. the PBS group (Fig. 3A-B). In vivo photothermal images indicated that a marginal temperature increase of only ΔT ≈ 3 ℃ was observed from the PBS group. Therefore, continuous 808 nm laser irradiation with 1 W/ cm2 did not cause overheating in tissues, which is a requirement for phototherapy in vivo. On the contrary, in the THA group, there existed a rapid temperature increase of ≈10 ℃, demonstrating that the THA revealed an effective in vivo photothermal conversion. Thus, THA can serve as an effective NIR-mediated PTT material for treating RA. After macrophages were induced into M1 macrophages with LPS, we assessed their survival rates after irradiation with an 808 nm laser for different time intervals. The results revealed a substantial reduction in cell viability corresponding to increased NIR irradiation time (Fig. 3D). Specifically, after 5 min of laser irradiation, the cell survival rate was about 52 %. According to the results, the photothermal effect of the THA could be induced by low intensity NIR irradiation, and the increased temperature efficiently enough to kill macrophage cells. 3.2. Biological activity of FA-THA To assess the photothermal effects of THA in AIA model rats, 200 µL of a solution containing THA (1 mg/kg) was injected into the knee joint cavity in AIA rats. The rats were then irradiated with an 808 nm NIR laser (1 W/cm2). A thermal imaging camera was adopted for capturing thermal images to record the knee joint temperature. The results showed that THA can achieve a continuous temperature increase up to 42 ◦ C for 5 min, which was obviously greater than the temperature observed in Fig. 3. Photothermal conversion efficiency in vivo and cytotoxicity of FA-THA. (A) Infrared thermal images of AIA rats that received PTT for different durations after intra-articular injection of FA-THA or PBS. (B) Corresponding temperature change over 5 min. (C) Flow cytometry analysis of cell uptake. (D) CCK-8 result showed the cytotoxicity of PTT. (E) The results of the CCK8 assay revealed the cell toxicity of THA and FA-THA. (F) IVIS images showing the location of Cy5-labeled THA and FA-THA at 0 day, 3 day, and 7 day post-injection, along with the quantitative analysis of Cy5-relative average radiant efficiency for both groups. The results are indicated as the mean ± SD from three separate assays; ****P < 0.001, ***P < 0.005, **P < 0.01, and *P < 0.05. 7 Z. Sun et al. Materials & Design 258 (2025) 114619 Flow cytometry was performed to observe the cellular uptake of FATHA and THA, which were fluorescently labeled with FITC. The results revealed that both M1 macrophages and M0 macrophages exhibited fluorescence after 12 h of coincubation. These findings showed that both types of nanospheres have successfully entered the cell because mac­ rophages undergo endocytosis. However, in M0 macrophages, no obvious difference was found in the fluorescence intensity of the two nanospheres, whereas the FA-THA fluorescence intensity in M1 macro­ phages increased considerably relative to that of THA (Fig. 3C). Following the confirmation of the targeting ability of FA-THA, a CCK-8 assay was applied to evaluate the cytotoxicity caused by the nanospheres, with unmodified THA used as a control. The viability of M1 macrophages lowered in a dose-dependent manner after 48 h of coincubation with either nanosphere (Fig. 3E). The two nanospheres exhibited different levels of toxicity toward M1 macrophages. To quantify these differences, we determined the IC50 values for each nanosphere with M1 macrophages. FA-THA, which is modified with FA, demonstrated increased cytotoxicity toward LPS-activated M1 macro­ phages. Compared to that of unmodified THA, the cell activity of FATHA was about one-fourth greater, indicating a significant difference. To visualize the in vivo distribution of FA-THA and THA, FA-THA and THA labeled with the near-infrared fluorescent dye Cy5 were injected into the knee joint cavity, with imaging conducted on days 0, 3, and 7 using the IVIS system (Fig. 3F). The imaging demonstrated that all nanospheres were retained within the local area, indicating minimal systemic dissemination to other tissues and organs, as evidenced by the absence of significant adverse reactions in other tissues. Quantitative analysis revealed that FA-THA exhibited markedly greater accumulation in the rheumatoid knee joint than THA immediately after injection, and this difference became progressively more pronounced over time.This Fig. 4. FA-THA can facilitate the transformation of M1 macrophages into M2 macrophages in vitro. (A) CD86 and CD206 immunofluorescence analysis of RAW264.7 cells treated with FA-THA for 24 h after LPS induction; scale bar: 50 µm. (B) Average CD86 and CD206 fluorescence intensities. (C) The results of the WB assays showed that TPL increased M2 marker levels but decreased M1 marker levels. (D) Quantification of CD206, iNOS, CD86, ARG1, IL-6, and IL-1β expression levels in RAW264.7 cells from each group. (E) Elisa results showed the levels of IL-1β, IL-6, IL-10, TNF-α, and TGF-β1 in each group. The results are indicated as the mean ± SD from three separate assays; ****P < 0.001, ***P < 0.005, **P < 0.01, and *P < 0.05. 8 Z. Sun et al. Materials & Design 258 (2025) 114619 indicates that FA modification enhances the targeting of inflamed regions. To assess the ability of FA-THA to regulate macrophage polarization under inflammatory conditions, we cultured RAW264.7 cells with 100 ng/mL LPS for 24 h to induce M1 polarization. We subsequently incu­ bated the cells with FA-THA for 12 h. CD86 and CD206 were added for immune staining of the cells. As displayed in Fig. 4A-B, the increased iNOS levels in the LPS group decreased obviously in the TPL and FA-THA groups. The results of the qPCR and WB assays also revealed that TPL and FA-THA inhibited the proinflammatory response induced by LPS while promoting the anti-inflammatory response (Fig. 4C-D and Fig. SI). Additionally, the ELISA results indicated that TPL and FA-THA had potent anti-inflammatory effects on activated macrophages. Compared to M0 cells, LPS-treated RAW264.7 cells produced significantly greater amounts of the proinflammatory cytokines TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-6 (Fig. 4E). TPL and FA-THA treatment induced IL-10 and TGF-β pro­ duction while decreasing TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-6 production. outcomes for RA and improvements in the ankle joints of AIA rats. To assess the treatment efficacy in rats, the AI score was evaluated by examining the swelling and redness of their foot pads. As depicted in Fig. 5B, the AI scores in the PBS group remained largely unchanged after 28 days of treatment, as anticipated. Although the AI score decreased in the TPL group, it was not as effective as the FA-THA treatment. Notably, FA-THA treatment led to a rapid decrease in the AI scores following joint cavity injection. A comparison between the outcomes of the FA-THA and NIR groups showed that the AI score of the AIA rats in the NIR group approached zero after 28 days, indicating a significantly greater efficacy than that of the other treatment groups. This finding suggested that the combination of PTT and targeted TPL delivery via FA-THA can yield excellent results in RA treatment. To validate the therapeutic potential of FA-THA, we examined the histology of synovial tissue in AIA rats. As presente in Fig. 5A, normal rat synovial tissue is smooth and reddish, with neatly arranged cells. The synovial tissue of AIA rats appeared dark red, was severely edematous, was infiltrated with inflammatory cells, and promoted fibrous tissue proliferation. Relative to the PBS treatment, the TPL treatment improved the amount of synovial tissue but resulted in hyperplasia. When compared with the THA group, the FA-THA group had a more regular synovial arrangement and reduced hyperplasia. After NIR irradiation, the synovial tissue of the NIR group closely resembled normal tissue, with only slight inflammatory cell infiltration. Synovial histological analysis was conducted to evaluate the efficacy in different groups (Fig. 5C). The synovial inflammation (synovitis) scores were the closest scores between the NIR and normal groups [50]. After 30 days of AIA treatment, micro-CT scanning of the knee joints of AIA rats and normal rats was conducted. As presented in Fig. 5A, the knee joints of normal rats appeared smooth, with no cartilage or sub­ chondral bone damage, whereas the knee joints of AIA rats injected with PBS exhibited severe bone destruction and loss. The tibiofemoral and patellofemoral joints showed damage to different degrees, with partial dissolution of the patella. AIA rats treated with TPL presented signs of 3.3. AIA model construction and FA-THA efficacy evaluation The severity of arthritis was assessed by observing changes in the foot pads of AIA rats across different treatment groups on days 7, 14, 21, and 28 and by measuring the width of the foot pads. As shown in Fig. 5A, by day 28, AIA rats in the PBS group exhibited edema with some ery­ thema. Although the rats in the TPL group exhibited reduced swelling, erythema was prominent. In contrast, the NIR group showed significant improvement due to the targeted delivery of FA-THA and PTT, with a marked reduction in edema and erythema compared to the other treatment groups. As shown in Fig. 5B, free TPL had limited local sol­ ubility, resulting in reduced bioavailability and a less pronounced therapeutic effect than those of the nanospheres. The degree of foot pad swelling in AIA rats treated with PTT decreased considerably relative to that in the remaining treatment groups, indicating superior therapeutic Fig. 5. AIA model construction and evaluation. (A) Macroscopic images of the paw, micro-CT images of the knee joint, and synovial tissue sections. (B) AI scores and paw width analysis. (C) Tb.Th and BV/TV analysis and Synovial histopathology score. The results are indicated as the mean ± SD from three separate assays; ****P < 0.001, ***P < 0.005, **P < 0.01, and *P < 0.05. 9 Z. Sun et al. Materials & Design 258 (2025) 114619 joint damage but with improved patellar lysis. Compared to those in the PBS and TPL groups, the knee joints in the THA and FA-THA groups presented bone erosion but with significant improvement. The FA-THA nanosphere treatment resulted in less cartilage loss, indicating that FAtargeted M1 macrophages have a greater therapeutic effect. To further quantify the effects of joint treatment on AIA rats, the bone volume fraction (BV/TV) and trabecular bone thickness (Tb.Th) were measured via micro-CT. The BV/TV measurement assesses cortical and cancellous bone mass, with an increase indicating greater bone formation than resorption, resulting in elevated bone mass. Trabecular bone, the cortical bone extension in cancellous bone, presents an irregular threedimensional structure in the medullary cavity and plays a role in sup­ porting hematopoietic tissue. The Tb.Th is a key indicator of the spatial structure of trabecular bone. As displayed in Fig. 5C, the BV/TV of the knee joint in AIA rats was about 5 %, and each treatment group pre­ sented different degrees of increase. NIR treatment significantly increased bone mass, which approached the normal bone mass of the rats. The quantification of Tb.Th showed a similar trend to that of the BV/TV value, further confirming that NIR improved the joint bone mass of AIA rats through PTT combined with TPL delivery. We assessed the therapeutic effect of FA-THA combined with NIR in AIA rats by conducting histopathological analysis. Knee joints from AIA and normal rats were stained with H&E and Safranin O. As shown in Fig. 6A, normal rat knee joints showed a flat and smooth articular cartilage surface without inflammatory cell infiltration. Conversely, the AIA model showed joint synovial edema, attracting inflammatory cells and causing erosion of the articular cartilage. The PBS group showed inflammatory cell infiltration, articular cartilage damage, and sub­ chondral bone erosion. After 30 days of treatment with TPL, while in­ flammatory cell infiltration improved to a certain degree, the surface of the articular cartilage remained ablated. However, treatment with THA and FA-THA significantly reduced articular cartilage destruction, with FA-THA exhibiting a stronger protective effect and less cartilage dam­ age. The articular cartilage of the NIR group was nearly indistinguishable from that of the normal group. Safranin O staining, which reflects the glycosaminoglycan content in chondrocytes, was used to evaluate the repair of articular cartilage. As shown in Fig. 6A, minimal glycosaminoglycan deposition was found in the PBS and TPL groups, suggesting severe cartilage damage. Relative to the THA group, the FA-THA group presented a larger glycosaminoglycan staining area. Among the five treatment groups, the NIR group showed the best therapeutic effect and the lowest Mankin’s scores (Fig. 6C) and the Osteoarthritis Research Society International (OARSI) scoring sys­ tem (Fig. 6D), demonstrating the efficacy of FA-THA combined with 808 nm NIR laser irradiation for RA treatment. To further investigate COL-2 deposition post-treatment in the AIA rat model, immunohistochemical staining for COL-2 was conducted in the knee joints. As shown in Fig. 6B, COL-2, an extracellular matrix component, reflects articular cartilage repair. The sham group had more deposits and a more regular arrangement, whereas the AIA model showed different degrees of reduction in COL-2 across the treatment groups. The phenotypic transition of synovial macrophages is tightly related to the degree of inflammation in the local microenvironment. According to the results of synovial immunofluorescence staining (Fig. 7A and B), numerous macrophages in the knee joints of individuals with RA exhibited M1 polarization to the M2 phenotype when FA-THA was injected, especially in the NIR group. The expression of a biomarker specific to the proinflammatory M1 phenotype (iNOS) increased considerably, whereas that specific to the anti-inflammatory M2 phenotype (ARG1) decreased in the PBS group when compared with the Sham, THA, FA-THA, and NIR groups (Fig. 7B). Comparatively, the NIR group showed the greatest downregulation of iNOS and upregulation of ARG1, suggesting optimal inhibition of inflammation and enhancement of M1 polarization to M2 in vivo. The TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-6 contents in the cartilage samples were detected by ELISA (Fig. 7C). Relative to the PBS group, the TPL group exhibited slightly lower production of these inflammatory factors, whereas the THA group exhibited lower levels of TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-6. Comparatively, the NIR group showed the Fig. 6. Histological staining of the knee joint was performed 30 days after AIA. (A) The results of H&E and Safranin O staining. (B) Immunohistochemistry results of type 2 collagen. (C) Mankin scores based on histological staining for quantitative analysis. (D) The relative quantification of the Osteoarthritis Research Society International (OARSI) scoring system, including maximal scores and sum scores. The results are indicated as the mean ± SD from three separate assays; ****P < 0.001, ***P < 0.005, **P < 0.01, and *P < 0.05. 10 Z. Sun et al. Materials & Design 258 (2025) 114619 Fig. 7. FA-THA can facilitate the transformation of M1 macrophages into M2 macrophages in vivo. (A) Immunofluorescence staining of tissue sections was carried out to show the expression of the macrophage markers ARG1 and iNOS; scale bar: 200 µm. (B) Average ARG1 and iNOS fluorescence intensities. (C) Expression levels of proinflammatory factors (IL-6, IL-1β, and TNF-α) in rat AIA models, as evaluated by ELISA analysis. The results are indicated as the mean ± SD from three separate assays; ****P < 0.001, ***P < 0.005, **P < 0.01, and *P < 0.05. greatest inhibition, followed by the FA-THA group. 4. Discussion 3.4. Biocompatibility evaluation HAP is an inorganic material extensively used for tissue regeneration because of its high biocompatibility, chemical stability, and mechanical strength [5,51,52]. Materials with nanopores that are 2–50 nm in size are classified as mesoporous. These materials exhibit unique textural properties, such as a larger surface area and pore size, which result in high surface adsorption and drug-loading capacity [53–55]. In this study, HAP hollow microspheres with a diameter of 26.55 nm loaded with TPL and AuNPs were synthesized through freeze-drying. HAP mesoporous microspheres offer a significantly greater surface area and pore volume than previous AuNPs for drug loading, enabling them to adsorb a higher quantity of therapeutic agents [25]. Rather than uti­ lizing AuNPs solely for drug delivery, we harness their photothermal properties to augment the destruction of inflammatory cells within the body, thereby enhancing the therapeutic impact [25,56]. In contrast to silica mesoporous microspheres, HAP mesoporous microspheres demonstrate superior drug adsorption and controlled release capabil­ ities. Notably, HAP microspheres retain half of the adsorbed drug for up to a week, whereas those loaded on AuNPs and silica microspheres release half within a single day [27]. This prolonged release mechanism is crucial for maintaining drug presence during the initial inflammatory stage of RA and for effectively modulating the inflammatory environ­ ment. Additionally, our nanodelivery system can be synthesized via one- After intervention for 30 days, the major organs of AIA rats, which included the heart, liver, spleen, lungs, and kidneys, were gathered and stained using H&E to assess damage to tissues. Simultaneously, blood from the AIA rats was sampled to measure serum biochemical indices indicative of hepatotoxicity (glutamine aminotransferase and AST) and nephrotoxicity (BUN and Cr). As shown in Fig. 8A, organ damage was not significantly different among the FA-THA, NIR, and PBS groups. In contrast, the TPL group presented prominent liver and kidney damage. Compared to the free TPL group, the THA group presented lower hep­ atorenal toxicity. To further evaluate hepatorenal toxicity, serum biochemical indices were evaluated in the AIA rats from the PBS, TPL, FA-THA, and NIR groups. As shown in Fig. 8B, the ALT, AST, BUN, and Cr in the TPL group increased considerably relative to those of the PBS group, highlighting the hepatorenal toxicity of free TPL. However, the serum biochemical results of the FA-THA group were comparable to those of the PBS group, suggesting that FA-targeted delivery enabled precise localization to the site of inflammation, sparing normal immune tissues from indiscriminate engulfment. 11 Z. Sun et al. Materials & Design 258 (2025) 114619 Fig. 8. Biocompatibility testing. (A) Heart, liver, spleen, lung, and kidney tissue sections. (B) The levels of ALT, AST, BUN, and Cr. The results are denoted as the mean ± SD from three separate assays; ****P < 0.001, ***P < 0.005, **P < 0.01, and *P < 0.05. pot method, making it more accessible for large-scale manufacturing and clinical applications. Many studies have chemically or physically combined FA with organic and inorganic carriers to achieve cell-targeted uptake of drugs [57]. The FA-conjugated drug copolymer binds to the FA receptor on the macrophage surface and accumulates in target cells, where it sinks into the cytoplasm to form an endocytic cavity. Owing to the action of the ion pump, the pH of the endocytic cavity decreases to 5, and the excessive carboxyl matrix in the FA receptor protein becomes protonated, result­ ing in a change in configuration. Then, the connection between the drug and FA is disrupted, and the drug passes through the endosomal enve­ lope into macrophages to exert its activity. Additionally, FA receptors are widely present in various organs of humans, and when inflammatory reactions occur, activated macrophages can produce more folate re­ ceptors. Our nanodelivery platform combines the advantages of previ­ ous research. TPL is used as a therapeutic drug to regulate the inflammatory microenvironment, and the modification of FA enhances the uptake of TPL by M1 macrophages, reduces the off-target killing of other cells and organs, and improves the repolarization of M1. The IVIS images show that both FA-THA and THA can be well retained in the joint cavity after local injection. The modification of FA enhances this per­ formance and reduces the impact of the nano-delivery platform on the organs[58]. As with previous studies [13,59,60], the immunofluores­ cence and WB results show that TPL can stimulate the conversion of M1 to M2, and folic acid modification significantly enhances this effect. Compared to TPL group, the expression of CD206 in FA-THA increases by approximately 30 % in vitro. The surface-enhanced near-field effect of AuNPs endows FA-THA with high photothermal properties [61,62]. The infrared thermal imaging shows that AuNPs have good photothermal efficiency consistent with the previous study [27], with an increase of about 40 ℃ in vitro and about 10 ℃ in vivo in 5 min. The mesoporous material of HAP with a diameter of 26.55 nm allows the nanoplatform to further target the site of inflammation through “ELVIS” effect, again reducing systemic toxicity and side effects. Animal experiments have shown that the prolonged release of the drug significantly improves rheumatoid arthritis. TPL has toxic side effects, with rapid distribution to the liver, kidney, plasma, spleen, lung, heart, and testicular tissues following oral administration. This was followed by rapid excretion via biliary, uri­ nary, and fecal routes, leading to acute cytotoxicity and multiorgan damage [63]. Organ damage was not significantly different among the FA-THA, NIR, and PBS groups. In contrast, the TPL group presented prominent liver and kidney damage. Compared to the free TPL group, the THA group presented lower hepatorenal toxicity, thereby avoiding vascular extravasation and passive accumulation in inflammatory cells. Instead, FA-THA was phagocytosed by inflammatory cells, which miti­ gated damage to the normal immune system and subsequent hep­ atorenal toxicity. The ALT, AST, BUN, and Cr in the TPL group increased considerably relative to those of the PBS group, highlighting the hep­ atorenal toxicity of free TPL. However, the serum biochemical results of the FA-THA group were comparable to those of the PBS group, suggesting that FA-targeted de­ livery enabled precise localization to the site of inflammation, sparing normal immune tissues from indiscriminate engulfment. This low degree of biological toxicity suggested that nanosphere loading can effectively lower the biological toxicity of TPL. The biological toxicity of the NIR group was evaluated, and the material’s characterization confirmed the photothermal stability of FA-THA. This indicated that FA-THA could withstand multiple photothermal irradiations without degradation. Furthermore, the serum biochemical indices of the NIR group were found to be almost identical to those of the PBS group, leading to the conclusion that in vivo NIR irradiation did not compromise the stability of the nanospheres or accelerate the release of TPL, thereby avoiding potential liver and kidney toxicity. Although TPL possesses certain reproductive toxicity, low-dose locally injected TPL demonstrates rela­ tively low reproductive toxicity [64–66]. As demonstrated in previous 12 Z. Sun et al. Materials & Design 258 (2025) 114619 studies, the sustained release of TPL via nano-drug delivery platforms, combined with their local administration, can effectively reduce its reproductive toxicity [67–69]. This study revealed that targeted delivery of TPL can decrease the release of inflammatory factors in the articular cavity by promoting the transition of M1 macrophages into M2 macrophages, thus facilitating the treatment of RA. However, more studies are required to comprehend the specific mechanisms or pathways involved in macrophage repolar­ ization. At the same time, the nanodelivery platform need to be loaded various drugs into more disease models to verify generalizability. Funding This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 82202713, No. 82402770), Shenzhen Science and Tech­ nology Program (Grant No. RCBS20231211090723041), and China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2024 M762060). Appendix A. Supplementary data Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. org/10.1016/j.matdes.2025.114619. 5. Conclusion Data availability This study developed a simple and economically viable nanodelivery platform. The construction of HAP microspheres loaded with AuNPs and TPL modified with FA enabled targeted delivery to M1 macrophages owing to the high expression of FA receptors on their surface. The synergistic treatment approach, combining the sustained release of TPL with the encapsulation of AuNPs within nanoparticles, facilitated the specific targeting and elimination of M1 macrophages in rheumatoid joints. This approach decreased the secretion of inflammatory factors and improved the microenvironment of the joint cavity. The mesoporous structure of HAP has good drug adsorption, loading and delivery effi­ ciency, and ensures good biocompatibility. The targeted effect greatly lowers the toxic side effects of the TPL on other cells and organs and the PTT effect of AuNPs enhances its killing efficiency and applicability. Based on the above advantages, the DDS is not only suitable for the treatment of RA, but also is expected to be extended to the treatment of other inflammatory diseases. Data will be made available on request. References [1] S. Mohammadian Haftcheshmeh, A.A. Momtazi-Borojeni, Immunomodulatory therapeutic effects of curcumin in rheumatoid arthritis, Autoimmun. Rev. 19 (2020) 102593, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autrev.2020.102593. [2] B. Li, C. Yang, M. Guo, S. Wang, W. Peng, Q. Guo, D. Ming, Y. Teng, B. Zheng, Ultrasound-Remote selected Activation Mitophagy for Precise Treatment of Rheumatoid Arthritis by Two-Dimensional Piezoelectric Nanosheets, ACS Nano 17 (2023) 621–635, https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c09834. [3] M. Mahler, L. Martinez-Prat, J.A. Sparks, K.D. Deane, Precision medicine in the care of rheumatoid arthritis: Focus on prediction and prevention of future clinically-apparent disease, Autoimmun. Rev. 19 (2020) 102506, https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.autrev.2020.102506. [4] Y. Zhang, X. Kang, J. Li, J. Song, X. Li, W. Li, J. Qi, Inflammation-Responsive Nanoagents for Activatable Photoacoustic Molecular Imaging and Tandem Therapies in Rheumatoid Arthritis, ACS Nano 18 (2024) 2231–2249, https://doi. org/10.1021/acsnano.3c09870. [5] F. Wan, H. Ping, W. Wang, Z. Zou, H. Xie, B.-L. Su, D. Liu, Z. Fu, Hydroxyapatitereinforced alginate fibers with bioinspired dually aligned architectures, Carbohydr. Polym. 267 (2021) 118167, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2021.118167. [6] Y. Zheng, K. Wei, P. Jiang, J. Zhao, Y. Shan, Y. Shi, F. Zhao, C. Chang, Y. Li, M. Zhou, X. Lv, S. Guo, D. He, Macrophage polarization in rheumatoid arthritis: signaling pathways, metabolic reprogramming, and crosstalk with synovial fibroblasts, Front. Immunol. 15 (2024) 1394108, https://doi.org/10.3389/ fimmu.2024.1394108. [7] G. Chen, B. Hao, D. Ju, M. Liu, H. Zhao, Z. Du, J. Xia, Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic study of triptolide-loaded liposome hydrogel patch under microneedles on rats with collagen-induced arthritis, Acta Pharm. Sin. B 5 (2015) 569–576, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsb.2015.09.006. [8] R. Goldbach-Mansky, Comparison of Tripterygium wilfordii Hook F Versus Sulfasalazine in the Treatment of Rheumatoid Arthritis: a Randomized Trial, Ann. Intern. Med. 151 (2009) 229, https://doi.org/10.7326/0003-4819-151-4200908180-00005. [9] The Chinese Herbal Remedy Tripterygium wilfordii Hook F in the Treatment of Rheumatoid Arthritis, Ann. Intern. Med. 151 (2009) I. https://doi.org/10.7326/ 0003-4819-151-4-200908180-00002. [10] Q. Rao, G. Ma, M. Li, H. Wu, Y. Zhang, C. Zhang, Z. Ma, L. Huang, Targeted delivery of triptolide by dendritic cell-derived exosomes for colitis and rheumatoid arthritis therapy in murine models, Br. J. Pharmacol. 180 (2023) 330–346, https:// doi.org/10.1111/bph.15958. [11] Y. Du, Y. Zhang, Z. Jiang, L. Xu, J. Ru, S. Wei, W. Chen, R. Dong, S. Zhang, T. Jia, Triptolide alleviates acute gouty arthritis caused by monosodium urate crystals by modulating macrophage polarization and neutrophil activity, Immunol. Lett. 269 (2024) 106907, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.imlet.2024.106907. [12] J. Xin Li, M. Jiao Zhang, J. Feng Shi, S. Peng Wang, X. Mei Zhong, Y. Han Wu, Y. Qu, H. Le Gao, J. Ming Zhang, pH-sensitive nano-polyelectrolyte complexes with arthritic macrophage-targeting delivery of triptolide, Int. J. Pharm. 632 (2023) 122572. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpharm.2022.122572. [13] A. Xu, R. Yang, M. Zhang, X. Wang, Y. Di, B. Jiang, Y. Di, Z. Zhou, L. Zhou, Macrophage targeted triptolide micelles capable of cGAS-STING pathway inhibition for rheumatoid arthritis treatment, J. Drug Target. 30 (2022) 961–972, https://doi.org/10.1080/1061186X.2022.2070173. [14] Y. Tong, X. Li, Q. Deng, J. Shi, Y. Feng, L. Bai, Advances of the small molecule drugs regulating fibroblast-like synovial proliferation for rheumatoid arthritis, Front. Pharmacol. 14 (2023) 1230293, https://doi.org/10.3389/ fphar.2023.1230293. [15] X. Zhou, D. Huang, R. Wang, M. Wu, L. Zhu, W. Peng, H. Tu, X. Deng, H. Zhu, Z. Zhang, X. Wang, X. Cao, Targeted therapy of rheumatoid arthritis via macrophage repolarization, Drug Deliv. 28 (2021) 2447–2459, https://doi.org/ 10.1080/10717544.2021.2000679. [16] K. Yuan, X. Li, Q. Lu, Q. Zhu, H. Jiang, T. Wang, G. Huang, A. Xu, Application and mechanisms of triptolide in the treatment of inflammatory diseases—a review, Front. Pharmacol. 10 (2019) 1469, https://doi.org/10.3389/fphar.2019.01469. [17] S. Li, Q. Chen, Y. Zhang, D. Wang, H. Hu, J. Li, C. Zhang, J. Zhang, Hyaluronic acid dissolving microneedle patch-assisted acupoint transdermal delivery of triptolide CRediT authorship contribution statement Zhenghua Sun: Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investiga­ tion. Xinzhou Peng: Writing – review & editing, Investigation. Liang Yang: Writing – review & editing, Supervision. Weixuan Liu: Writing – review & editing. Wenjun Liu: Writing – review & editing, Supervision. Xinyuan Du: Methodology. Jiajia Zhuo: Software, Resources, Meth­ odology, Conceptualization. Bingbo Bao: Visualization, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Data curation, Conceptu­ alization. Chao Zhou: Supervision, Resources, Methodology. Hao Xiong: Writing – review & editing, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization. Declaration of competing interest The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Acknowledgements The authors appreciate the Department of Orthopedics, Shanghai Sixth People’s Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine. Ethics approval and consent to participate All experimental animal protocols were approved by the Animal Welfare Ethics Committee of Shanghai Sixth People’s Hospital and the Animal Laboratory of Shanghai Sixth People’s Hospital (No: DWLL20230392). Consent for publication Not applicable. 13 Z. Sun et al. Materials & Design 258 (2025) 114619 for effective rheumatoid arthritis treatment, Sci. Rep. 14 (2024) 25256, https:// doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-76341-w. [18] J.S.R. Viegas, F.G. Praça, M. Kravicz, M.V.L.B. Bentley, Therapeutic applications and delivery systems for triptolide, Drug Deliv, Transl. Res. 10 (2020) 1584–1600, https://doi.org/10.1007/s13346-020-00827-z. [19] M. Zhang, W. Hu, C. Cai, Y. Wu, J. Li, S. Dong, Advanced application of stimuliresponsive drug delivery system for inflammatory arthritis treatment, Mater. Today Bio 14 (2022) 100223, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mtbio.2022.100223. [20] M.C. Bruno, M.C. Cristiano, C. Celia, N. d’Avanzo, A. Mancuso, D. Paolino, J. Wolfram, M. Fresta, Injectable Drug delivery Systems for Osteoarthritis and Rheumatoid Arthritis, ACS Nano 16 (2022) 19665–19690, https://doi.org/ 10.1021/acsnano.2c06393. [21] W. Pan, Z. Li, S. Qiu, C. Dai, S. Wu, X. Zheng, M. Guan, F. Gao, Octahedral Pt-MOF with Au deposition for plasmonic effect and Schottky junction enhanced hydrogenothermal therapy of rheumatoid arthritis, Mater. Today Bio 13 (2022) 100214, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mtbio.2022.100214. [22] Y. Liu, X. Nie, Y. Wu, L. Lin, Q. Liao, J. Li, S.-M.-Y. Lee, H. Li, J. Zhang, Carrier-Free Gambogic Acid Dimer Self-Assembly Nanomedicines for Rheumatoid Arthritis Treatment, Int. J. Nanomedicine 18 (2023) 5457–5472, https://doi.org/10.2147/ IJN.S422096. [23] X. Zheng, H. Yang, Z. Zhang, X. Liang, Y. Liu, C. Wang, X. Yang, J. Tang, J. Mao, Y. Nie, X. Zhou, C. Li, pH-responsive size-adjustable liposomes induce apoptosis of fibroblasts and macrophages for rheumatoid arthritis treatment, Acta Biomater. 179 (2024) 256–271, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actbio.2024.03.006. [24] J. Kim, H.Y. Kim, S.Y. Song, S. Go, H.S. Sohn, S. Baik, M. Soh, K. Kim, D. Kim, H.C. Kim, N. Lee, B.-S. Kim, T. Hyeon, Synergistic Oxygen Generation and Reactive Oxygen Species Scavenging by Manganese Ferrite/Ceria Co-decorated Nanoparticles for Rheumatoid Arthritis Treatment, ACS Nano 13 (2019) 3206–3217, https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.8b08785. [25] X. Li, H. Wang, X. Zou, H. Su, C. Li, Methotrexate-loaded folic acid of solid-phase synthesis conjugated gold nanoparticles targeted treatment for rheumatoid arthritis, Eur. J. Pharm. Sci. 170 (2022) 106101, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. ejps.2021.106101. [26] M. Xu, T. Fu, C. Zhang, Z. An, J. Yan, Z. Lu, H. Wu, J. Liu, L. Qiu, L. Shi, J. Lin, Y. Cao, R. Pei, Prolonged, staged, and self-regulated methotrexate release coupled with ROS scavenging in an injectable hydrogel for rheumatoid arthritis therapy, J. Controlled Release 375 (2024) 60–73, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. jconrel.2024.08.046. [27] X. Li, Y. Hou, X. Meng, G. Li, F. Xu, L. Teng, F. Sun, Y. Li, Folate receptor-targeting mesoporous silica-coated gold nanorod nanoparticles for the synergistic photothermal therapy and chemotherapy of rheumatoid arthritis, RSC Adv. 11 (2021) 3567–3574, https://doi.org/10.1039/D0RA08689D. [28] A. Ali, C. Jori, A. Kanika, R.K. Kumar, Recent trends in stimuli-responsive hydrogels for the management of rheumatoid arthritis, J. Drug Deliv Sci. Technol. 89 (2023) 104985, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jddst.2023.104985. [29] S. Wang, J. Lv, S. Meng, J. Tang, L. Nie, Recent advances in Nanotheranostics for Treat-to-Target of Rheumatoid Arthritis, Adv. Healthc. Mater. 9 (2020) 1901541, https://doi.org/10.1002/adhm.201901541. [30] X. Fu, Y. Song, X. Feng, Z. Liu, W. Gao, H. Song, Q. Zhang, Synergistic chemotherapy/PTT/oxygen enrichment by multifunctional liposomal polydopamine nanoparticles for rheumatoid arthritis treatment, Asian J. Pharm. Sci. 19 (2024) 100885, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajps.2024.100885. [31] L. Ruan, X. Cai, R. Qian, S. Bei, L. Wu, J. Cao, S. Shen, Live macrophages loaded with Fe3O4 and sulfasalazine for ferroptosis and photothermal therapy of rheumatoid arthritis, Mater. Today Bio 24 (2024) 100925, https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.mtbio.2023.100925. [32] S. Zhang, L. Wu, J. Cao, K. Wang, Y. Ge, W. Ma, X. Qi, S. Shen, Effect of magnetic nanoparticles size on rheumatoid arthritis targeting and photothermal therapy, Colloids Surf. B Biointerfaces 170 (2018) 224–232, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. colsurfb.2018.06.016. [33] L. Qiu, S. Lei, J. Zhang, R. Yan, W. Chen, J. Lin, W.-G. Zhu, P. Huang, HDAC6 inhibitor loaded bimetallene nanosheets with antagonizing thermoresistance for augmented mild photothermal therapy, Chin. Chem. Lett. 34 (2023) 108344, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cclet.2023.108344. [34] R. Zhang, J. Qu, The mechanisms and efficacy of photobiomodulation therapy for arthritis: a comprehensive review, Int. J. Mol. Sci. 24 (2023) 14293, https://doi. org/10.3390/ijms241814293. [35] Y. Dong, W. Cao, J. Cao, Treatment of rheumatoid arthritis by phototherapy: advances and perspectives, Nanoscale 13 (2021) 14591–14608, https://doi.org/ 10.1039/D1NR03623H. [36] P. Rahimizadeh, Z. Rezaieyazdi, F. Behzadi, A. Hajizade, S.I. Lim, Nanotechnology as a promising platform for rheumatoid arthritis management: diagnosis, treatment, and treatment monitoring, Int. J. Pharm. 609 (2021) 121137, https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpharm.2021.121137. [37] Q. Ain, M. Zeeshan, S. Khan, H. Ali, Biomimetic hydroxyapatite as potential polymeric nanocarrier for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis, J. Biomed. Mater. Res. A 107 (2019) 2595–2600, https://doi.org/10.1002/jbm.a.36765. [38] M.M. Steinz, A. Ezdoglian, F. Khodadust, C.F.M. Molthoff, M. Srinivasarao, P. S. Low, G.J.C. Zwezerijnen, M. Yaqub, W. Beaino, A.D. Windhorst, S.W. Tas, G. Jansen, C.J. Van Der Laken, Folate Receptor Beta for Macrophage Imaging in Rheumatoid Arthritis, Front. Immunol. 13 (2022) 819163, https://doi.org/ 10.3389/fimmu.2022.819163. [39] R. Venkatesan, H. Xiong, Y. Yao, J. Reddy Nakkala, T. Zhou, S. Li, C. Fan, C. Gao, Immuno-modulating theranostic gold nanocages for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis in vivo, Chem. Eng. J. 446 (2022) 136868, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. cej.2022.136868. [40] R. Guo, X. Zhang, D. Yan, Y. Yu, Y. Wang, H. Geng, Y. Wu, Y. Liu, L. Kong, X. Li, Folate-modified triptolide liposomes target activated macrophages for safe rheumatoid arthritis therapy, Biomater. Sci. 10 (2022) 499–513, https://doi.org/ 10.1039/D1BM01520F. [41] E. Nogueira, A.C. Gomes, A. Preto, A. Cavaco-Paulo, Folate-targeted nanoparticles for rheumatoid arthritis therapy, Nanomedicine Nanotechnol, Biol. Med. 12 (2016) 1113–1126, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nano.2015.12.365. [42] Y. Wang, R. Guo, M. Zou, L. Jiang, L. Kong, S. Zhao, X. Zhang, W. Wang, B. Xu, Combined ROS Sensitive Folate Receptor Targeted Micellar Formulations of Curcumin Effective against Rheumatoid Arthritis in Rat Model, Int. J. Nanomedicine 19 (2024) 4217–4234, https://doi.org/10.2147/IJN.S458957. [43] Y. Li, S. Wei, Y. Sun, S. Zong, Y. Sui, Nanomedicine-based combination of dexamethasone palmitate and MCL-1 siRNA for synergistic therapeutic efficacy against rheumatoid arthritis, Drug Deliv, Transl. Res. 11 (2021) 2520–2529, https://doi.org/10.1007/s13346-021-01037-x. [44] Y. Tie, H. Zheng, Z. He, J. Yang, B. Shao, L. Liu, M. Luo, X. Yuan, Y. Liu, X. Zhang, H. Li, M. Wu, X. Wei, Targeting folate receptor β positive tumor-associated macrophages in lung cancer with a folate-modified liposomal complex, Signal Transduct. Target. Ther. 5 (2020) 6, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41392-020-0115-0. [45] A. Balfourier, J. Kolosnjaj-Tabi, N. Luciani, F. Carn, F. Gazeau, Gold-based therapy: from past to present, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 117 (2020) 22639–22648, https://doi. org/10.1073/pnas.2007285117. [46] J. Tang, X. Jiang, L. Wang, H. Zhang, Z. Hu, Y. Liu, X. Wu, C. Chen, Au@Pt nanostructures: a novel photothermal conversion agent for cancer therapy, Nanoscale 6 (2014) 3670, https://doi.org/10.1039/c3nr06841b. [47] J. Qiu, M. Xie, T. Wu, D. Qin, Y. Xia, Gold nanocages for effective photothermal conversion and related applications, Chem. Sci. 11 (2020) 12955–12973, https:// doi.org/10.1039/D0SC05146B. [48] L.C. Kennedy, L.R. Bickford, N.A. Lewinski, A.J. Coughlin, Y. Hu, E.S. Day, J. L. West, R.A. Drezek, A New Era for Cancer Treatment: Gold-NanoparticleMediated thermal Therapies, Small 7 (2011) 169–183, https://doi.org/10.1002/ smll.201000134. [49] X. Zhong, X. Deng, Y. Yang, X. Xie, B. Li, X. Peng, Immuno-engineered macrophage membrane-coated nanodrug to restore immune balance for rheumatoid arthritis treatment, Acta Biomater. 197 (2025) 374–385, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. actbio.2025.03.023. [50] R. Roubenoff, L.M. Freeman, D.E. Smith, L.W. Abad, C.A. Dinarello, J.J. Kehayias, Adjuvant arthritis as a model of inflammatory cachexia, Arthritis Rheum. 40 (1997) 534–539, https://doi.org/10.1002/art.1780400320. [51] G. Cheng, S. Guo, M. Li, S. Xiao, B. Jiang, Y. Ding, Hydroxyapatite-Coated Small Intestinal Submucosa Membranes Enhanced Periodontal Tissue Regeneration through Immunomodulation and Osteogenesis via BMP-2/Smad Signaling Pathway, Adv. Healthc. Mater. 13 (2024) 2301479, https://doi.org/10.1002/ adhm.202301479. [52] R. Wang, Y. Hua, H. Wu, J. Wang, Y. Xiao, X. Chen, Q. Ao, Q. Zeng, X. Zhu, X. Zhang, Hydroxyapatite nanoparticles promote TLR4 agonist-mediated antitumor immunity through synergically enhanced macrophage polarization, Acta Biomater. 164 (2023) 626–640, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actbio.2023.04.027. [53] J. Sans, M. Arnau, P. Turon, C. Alemán, Permanently polarized hydroxyapatite, an outstanding catalytic material for carbon and nitrogen fixation, Mater. Horiz. 9 (2022) 1566–1576, https://doi.org/10.1039/D1MH02057A. [54] R. Verma, S.R. Mishra, V. Gadore, Md. Ahmaruzzaman, Hydroxyapatite-based composites: Excellent materials for environmental remediation and biomedical applications, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci. 315 (2023) 102890, https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.cis.2023.102890. [55] X. Han, T. Zhang, X. Wang, Z. Zhang, Y. Li, Y. Qin, B. Wang, A. Han, J. Liu, Hollow mesoporous atomically dispersed metal-nitrogen-carbon catalysts with enhanced diffusion for catalysis involving larger molecules, Nat. Commun. 13 (2022), https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-30520-3. [56] J. Li, L. Chen, X. Xu, Y. Fan, X. Xue, M. Shen, X. Shi, Targeted Combination of Antioxidative and Anti-Inflammatory Therapy of Rheumatoid Arthritis using Multifunctional Dendrimer-Entrapped Gold Nanoparticles as a Platform, Small 16 (2020) 2005661, https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.202005661. [57] D.M.S.H. Chandrupatla, C.F.M. Molthoff, A.A. Lammertsma, C.J. Van Der Laken, G. Jansen, The folate receptor β as a macrophage-mediated imaging and therapeutic target in rheumatoid arthritis, Drug Deliv, Transl. Res. 9 (2019) 366–378, https://doi.org/10.1007/s13346-018-0589-2. [58] H. Zhang, H. Xiong, W. Ahmed, Y. Yao, S. Wang, C. Fan, C. Gao, Reactive oxygen species-responsive and scavenging polyurethane nanoparticles for treatment of osteoarthritis in vivo, Chem. Eng. J. 409 (2021) 128147, https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.cej.2020.128147. [59] T. Wang, C. Huang, Z. Fang, A. Bahatibieke, D. Fan, X. Wang, H. Zhao, Y. Xie, K. Qiao, C. Xiao, Y. Zheng, A dual dynamically cross-linked hydrogel promotes rheumatoid arthritis repair through ROS initiative regulation and microenvironment modulation-independent triptolide release, Mater. Today Bio 26 (2024) 101042, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mtbio.2024.101042. [60] K. Wang, K. Zhu, Z. Zhu, F. Shao, R. Qian, C. Wang, H. Dong, Y. Li, Z. Gao, J. Zhao, Triptolide with hepatotoxicity and nephrotoxicity used in local delivery treatment of myocardial infarction by thermosensitive hydrogel, J. Nanobiotechnology 21 (2023) 227, https://doi.org/10.1186/s12951-023-01980-6. [61] Y.Y. Su, X.Y. Jiang, L.J. Zheng, Y.W. Yang, S.Y. Yan, Y. Tian, W. Tian, W.F. Liu, Z. G. Teng, H. Yao, S.J. Wang, L.J. Zhang, Hybrid Au-star@Prussian blue for highperformance towards bimodal imaging and photothermal treatment, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 634 (2023) 601–609, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2022.12.043. [62] M. Jeon, G. Kim, W. Lee, S. Baek, H.N. Jung, H.-J. Im, Development of theranostic dual-layered Au-liposome for effective tumor targeting and photothermal therapy, 14 Z. Sun et al. Materials & Design 258 (2025) 114619 J. Nanobiotechnology 19 (2021) 262, https://doi.org/10.1186/s12951-02101010-3. [63] Q. Ren, M. Li, Y. Deng, A. Lu, J. Lu, Triptolide delivery: Nanotechnology-based carrier systems to enhance efficacy and limit toxicity, Pharmacol. Res. 165 (2021) 105377, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.phrs.2020.105377. [64] B. Ni, Z. Jiang, X. Huang, F. Xu, R. Zhang, Z. Zhang, Y. Tian, T. Wang, T. Zhu, J. Liu, L. Zhang, Male reproductive toxicity and toxicokinetics of triptolide in rats, Arzneim. Forsch. 58 (2011) 673–680, https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0031-1296570. [65] J.-C. Ge, Q. Qian, Y.-H. Gao, Y.-F. Zhang, Y.-X. Li, X. Wang, Y. Fu, Y.-M. Ma, Q. Wang, Toxic effects of tripterygium glycoside tablets on the reproductive system of Male rats by metabolomics, cytotoxicity, and molecular docking, Phytomedicine 114 (2023) 154813, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.phymed.2023.154813. [66] N. Singla, S. Challana, Reproductive toxicity of triptolide in Male house rat, rattus rattus, Sci. World J. 2014 (2014) 1–6, https://doi.org/10.1155/2014/879405. [67] C.W.K. Lam, C. Zhang, F. Peng, W. Liu, J. Wan, C. Wan, H. Xu, X. Yang, Nanostructured lipid carriers as a novel oral delivery system for triptolide: induced changes in pharmacokinetics profile associated with reduced toxicity in Male rats, Int. J. Nanomedicine (2014), https://doi.org/10.2147/IJN.S55144. [68] D. Ru, C. Ding, L. Liu, H. Liu, M. Shen, Y. Duan, H. Li, pH sensitive triptolideloaded liposome calcium phosphate nanoparticles exhibit enhanced anti-tumor activities against ovarian cancer without damaging the reproductive system, J. Biomed. Nanotechnol. 13 (2017) 1413–1424, https://doi.org/10.1166/ jbn.2017.2429. [69] X. Deng, T. Zeng, J. Li, C. Huang, M. Yu, X. Wang, L. Tan, M. Zhang, A. Li, J. Hu, Kidney-targeted triptolide-encapsulated mesoscale nanoparticles for highefficiency treatment of kidney injury, Biomater. Sci. 7 (2019) 5312–5323, https:// doi.org/10.1039/C9BM01290G. 15