JOM, Vol. 70, No. 12, 2018 https://doi.org/10.1007/s11837-018-3048-0 Ó 2018 The Minerals, Metals & Materials Society MULTIPHASE FLOWS IN MATERIALS PROCESSING Numerical Modeling of EBCHM for Large-Scale TC4 Alloy Round Ingots LEI GAO,1 HAIGUANG HUANG,2 YUQIN ZHANG,1 HONGMING ZHANG,3 ZHE SHI,4 YEHUA JIANG,1,5 and RONG ZHOU1 1.—School of Materials Science and Engineering, Kunming University of Science and Technology, Kunming 650093, China. 2.—R&D Center, Yunnan Titanium Industry Co., Ltd., Chuxiong 675000, China. 3.—Department of Engineering Mechanics, Kunming University of Science and Technology, Kunming 650093, China. 4.—Faculty of Metallurgical and Energy Engineering, Kunming University of Science and Technology, Kunming 650093, China. 5.—e-mail: 1742944769@qq.com The Electron beam cold hearth remelting (EBCHR) process has emerged as a key process in producing overlength TC4 round ingots. However, the quality of the ingots suffer from inhomogeneous composition segregation which is induced by improper operations. In the present study, a numerical model verified with experimental data from the literature was employed to investigate the finer details of EBCHM process. In order to track temperature evolution on the mold surface, heating by an approximating beam-pattern, userdefined function compiled with C code was added to the calculation. In addition, the evolution of the solid–liquid interface and melt-flow during EBCHM were also investigated under different operation conditions. The recommended pool morphology was found when the inlet velocity was 0.0295 m/s, the temperature of the inlet was maintained at 2173 K, and the mold surface was maintained at 1973 K. In those conditions, stirring inside the pool was strengthened to homogenize the composition, which may optimize the quality of the ingots. INTRODUCTION Titanium alloys are light in weight, and have very high tensile strength as well as toughness. With these distinctive advantages, titanium alloys are widely accepted as one of the potential future materials. However, the high cost of both raw materials and processing has limited their applications.1 To reduce the cost, electron beam cold hearth remelting (EBCHR) has emerged as a key process in producing high-quality titanium alloy ingots and electrodes.2 Compared to vacuum arc remelting (VAR), EBCHM is able to effectively consolidate both sponge and scrap material while removing undesired impurities and inclusions, such as low-density and high-density inclusions.3 Thus, EBCHM has become a possible solution for producing single-melt ingots, the application of which will significantly reduce the energy and time costs of titanium alloy 2934 plates.4 EBCHM also breaks through the length limitation of VAR titanium alloy ingots, and produces ultralong ingots, over 10 m in length, for applications of high-quality seamless tubes. Although EBCHM shows many advantages, the technique also faces challenges which requiring solutions. Due to the surging of the saturated vapor pressure of additive alloy elements at high temperature, elements like aluminum may lose 30% during the EBCHM process.5 Because of this serious evaporation loss, the quality of TC4 ingots manipulated by EBCHM suffers from inhomogeneous composition segregation.6 Even though extra aluminum has been provided in the feedstock to compensate the continuous evaporation loss on the surface of the melt, composition control is still a serious problem since none of the stirring techniques can be applied. To reduce the defects, a robust understanding of the EBCHM process, namely the evolution of temperature, flow and solidification during alloy casting, is (Published online July 31, 2018) Numerical Modeling of EBCHM for Large-Scale TC4 Alloy Round Ingots urgently required. Meanwhile, a sound system for process control should be developed to homogenize the composition in the melt during EBCHM. Unusually, unlike other casting techniques, EBCHM utilizes a high-energy density electron beam as the heat source for continuous casting of alloy ingots under vacuum condition. The electron beam is set to move following different patterns to scan the melt surface under high frequency. The beam target is subject to a high local flux, which in turn produces a strong temperature gradient in that area.6 By adjusting the beam-scan pattern and frequency, the temperature gradient on the molten surface can be controlled, and the evaporation of alloy elements can be restrained.7,8 In addition, elaborate control of the surface temperature and casting speed can modify the curvature of the solid– liquid interface in the mold, which is a key factor for producing ingots with a perfect crystal structure.9 Recently, the finite element method was introduced to predict temperature evolution during the EBCHM process.10 The purpose is to declare the evolution of the solid–liquid front in the ingots, since they are directly connected with ingot quality. However, for most reported in the literature, the temperature on the surface was set as constant in order to simplify the model. Only a few attempts have been made to involve the influence of beampattern operation conditions on the melt surface and the effect of overflow from the cold hearth on flow evolution.1,11 In the present manuscript, an approximating beam-pattern for casting TC4 ingots, with a diameter of 260 mm, has been designed and tested by numerical modeling to discover the temperature evolution on the surface of the mold. To control the movement of the beam, a user-defined function (UDF) was compiled and added to the CFD model. In addition, the evolution of the solid–liquid interface for large-scale TC4 round ingots was also investigated in different EBCHM operation conditions to provide details for the elaborate control of 2935 TC4 ingot manipulation. The purpose is to restrain inhomogeneous composition segregation, and improve the quality of large-scale TC4 round ingots. NUMERICAL MODELING Summary of Boundary Conditions A schematic diagram of the EBCHM process is shown in Fig. 1a. To save calculation time, only the solidification part of the EBCHM process is focused on. A summary of the boundary conditions of the mold is illustrated in Fig. 1b. TC4 melt is assumed to flow into the mold with constant velocity and constant temperature from the inlet. Radiation heat loss and extra heat flux provided by the electron beam are attached with the UDF energy source term. With continuous water-cooling on the side wall of the copper mold, the solidified ingot is pulled out of the calculation domain from the outlet. Around 550,000 hexahedral cells with minimum mesh size 0.1 mm3 are generated inside the calculation domain for all the mathematical simulations. It was found that, after using 420,000 cells, gridindependent converged solutions were obtained. In addition, the SIMPLEC algorithm has been used for pressure–velocity coupling. The discretization model for calculating gradient, pressure and movement are Green-Gauss cell-based, PRESTO and third-order MUSCL. For the rest, second-order upwind is utilized as the discretization model. In addition, a realizable k–e viscous model as well as a solidification model are employed in the domain, to capture gird independent converged solutions flow turbulence and liquid–solid interface evolution. The time step for unsteady state calculation with constant surface temperature is 5e3 s. This needs to be adjusted to 5e5 s when the movement of the electron beam is tracked. For judging convergence, the default convergence criterion employing residual values in FLUENT has been utilized. Fig. 1. The schematic diagram of (a) EBCHM process and (b) boundary conditions summary. 2936 Gao, Huang, Y. Zhang, H. Zhang, Shi, Jiang, and Zhou Theories Attached UDF Heat Source 12 An enthalpy–porosity technique has been used to simulate the solidification/melting process with ANSYS Fluent 17.0. In this technique, a quantity, called the liquid fraction, which indicates the fraction of the cell volume that is in liquid form, is associated with each cell in the domainm based on an enthalpy balance with equations as follows. Energy Equations The enthalpy of the material is computed as the sum of the sensible enthalpy, he, and the latent heat, DH: H ¼ he þ DH ð1Þ where he ¼ href þ ZT cp dT ð2Þ Tref 2 2 1 ðxx0 Þ þ2ðyy0 Þ 2r e 2pr2 (     ) p t  t qreal ¼ cos tp  qeb ðx; yÞ 2 tp floor ceil qeb ðx; yÞ ¼ geb Peb ð7Þ ð8Þ where qeb ðx; yÞ is the heat flux of the electron beam following Gaussian distribution. In order to avoid over-heating, the electron beam is usually applied as pulse. To describe that, qeb ðx; yÞ was intermittent activated with constant duration tp , and can be modified in a revised form, qreal , in Eq. 8. Properties of TC4 Alloy and href is the reference enthalpy, Tref is the reference temperature, and cp is the specific heat at constant pressure. The liquid fraction, b, can be defined as: 8 if T < Tsolidus <b ¼ 0 b¼1 if T > Tliquidus ð3Þ : b ¼ TTsolidus if T < T < T liquidus solidus Tliquidus Tsolidus Tliquidus is the liquidus temperature while Tsolidus is the solidus temperature of the melt. The latent heat can be written in terms of the latent heat of the material, L: DH ¼ bL To describe the movement of the electron beam, a UDF was activated with C codes, and the energy source of the electron beam can be described with Eqs. 7–8: The properties of the TC4 alloy adopted in the simulation are provided by Ref. 13, as presented in Fig. 2. In addition, the heat transfer coefficient between the copper mold and the TC4 ingot is 2000 W/(m2 K), which is also recommended by Ref. 13. EXPERIMENTAL VERIFICATION To test the UDF attached model, beam movement on a simplified geometry was tracked as shown in Fig. 3. The electron beam was ordered to move with a settled cylindrical spiral for 1 s. Then, the model ð4Þ The latent heat content can vary between zero (for a solid) and L (for a liquid). For solidification/melting problems, the energy equation is written as @ ðqH Þ þ r  ðq~ vH Þ ¼ r  ðkrT Þ þ S @t ð5Þ where S is the energy source term. Momentum Sink The enthalpy–porosity technique treats the mushy region (the partially solidified region) as a porous medium. The porosity in each cell is set equal to the liquid fraction in that cell. In fully solidified regions, the porosity is equal to zero, which extinguishes the velocities in these regions. The momentum sink due to the reduced porosity in the mushy zone takes the following form:12   ð 1  bÞ 2 S1 ¼  3 v~ vp  Amush ~ b þe ð6Þ vp is where Amush is the mushy zone constant, and ~ the solid velocity due to pull velocity. Fig. 2. Physical properties of TC4 utilized in the numerical model. Numerical Modeling of EBCHM for Large-Scale TC4 Alloy Round Ingots 2937 Fig. 3. Electron beam movement tracking in a simplified model. Fig. 4. Experimental verification of the solidification model attached with beam melting. was extended with boundary conditions used for the electron beam button melting experiment reported in Ref. 13. Elaborate experimental data from the literature has been selected as a comparison, where the TC4 sample is melted by a circular-moving electron beam under vacuum.13 With the numerical model recommended in the present study, the solid–liquid interface evolution of the sample is shown on the righthand-side of Fig. 3, and compared with etched crosssections of the button samples on the left-hand-side. The liquid pool profile can be easily identified in the etched sample by the change in grain size, from large grains in the liquid pool to smaller grains outside the liquid pool. The comparison in Fig. 4 indicates that the model can track the evolution of the solid–liquid interface under beam melting, and provide a precise prediction of the melting/solidification process for the TC4 alloy. The slight difference is induced by the evaporation weight loss of the sample. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Temperature Evolution with an Approximate Electron Beam Pattern for the EBCHM Process A high-temperature molten surface is one of the main sources for element evaporation. Literature reports assume that the evaporation can be restrained by increasing the beam frequency, because it decreases the steep temperature gradient of the melt. In order to understand the temperature evolution on the mold surface during EBCHM and the distribution of the temperature gradient, a beam pattern, which was developed closely aligned with reality, was adopted in the numerical model. The beam pattern was designed with 20 shrinking concentric circles with equidistant intervals, as presented in Fig. 5a. With very small time steps, this numerical model was able to track the movement of the heat source with a pulse 2938 Gao, Huang, Y. Zhang, H. Zhang, Shi, Jiang, and Zhou Fig. 5. Temperature evolution of d = 260 mm TC4 round ingot, which is heating with an approximating electron beam pattern indicates in (a), (b) when the beam pulse is placed at the peak, (c) when the pulse is placed in the trough, (d) recording at 5 different points on the mold surface with time, (e) on the vertical section in steady state, and (f) recording at 5 different points on the vertical section with time. duration 0.1 ms and beam frequency of 5 Hz, and reveal the temperature distribution on the surface of the mold. Apparently, the temperature gradient of the results are largely dependent on whether the time step is placed at the peak of the electron beam pulse. Numerical Modeling of EBCHM for Large-Scale TC4 Alloy Round Ingots If the beam pulse is active at the peak, drastic heat flux will lead to an instantaneous steep temperature gradient up to 700 K (Fig. 5b). This temperature gradient will soon be reduced, since the beam moves ahead and the pulse goes into troughs, as shown in Fig. 5c, where the temperature gradient on the surface becomes more gentle. To discover the temperature evolution on the surface with time, 5 points at different positions were selected for data recording with 220,000 time steps. The results in Fig. 5d show that the energy exchange near point 5 was easily balanced with the cooperation between the input heat flux and heat loss, and the temperature at that location has very small variations around 2040 K. For the other four points near the center, a gentle temperature gradient was observed, and the peak temperature is located at point 1 where the cooling effect from the inlet was exhausted. In the cross-sections of the ingot, temperature distribution presents a stable pattern, as shown in Fig. 5e. The temperature evolution on the pattern was recorded with 5 points, 0.02 m apart, as presented in Fig. 5f. Clearly, the gentle temperature variation on the surface shows minimal influence on the deeper parts after steady-state, due to heat convection in the molten pool. Note that the temperature evolution during EBCHM will not only affect the evaopration but also plays an important role in the evolution of the solid–liquid interface, which is a key factor for producing ingots with a perfect crystal structure.14 Solid–Liquid Interface Evolution During EBCHM Process In order to understand the solid–liquid interface evolution, the EBCHM casting process is simulated by a solidification model under several operation conditions. Since, in the last section, only a gentle temperature gradient has been found on the surface of the mold with proper beam pattern design and beam frequency control, a constant temperature is utilized to save calculation time for the simulation work presented in this section. The predictions of the solid–liquid interface at steady-state are compared in Fig. 6. In Fig. 6a, the temperature for the inlet and molten surface were maintained at 1973 K, and the velocity of inlet was switched from 0.0195 m/s to 0.0395 m/s with a corresponding casting speed, namely from 213 kg/h to 431 kg/h. Clearly, increasing casting speed will enhance the depth of the solid–liquid interface on the cross-section, and influence the morphology of the liquid pool. A flat crystallization was observed when the inlet velocity was 0.0195 m/s, and this will tend to a ‘‘V’’ shape with increased inlet flow, as shown in Fig. 6b. The flat crystallization front was recommended in the literature since it permits the forming of dendrite structures. Conversely, a V-shaped solid– 2939 liquid interface, namely deep in the center and shallow at the periphery, will create a non-uniform structure along its radius.15 Even so, the decision to change the casting speed to a low level need to be taken cautiously, since it will largely extend the casting time, and increase energy costs. Except for adjusting the inlet velocity, the center and depth of the solid–liquid interface can also be manipulated by changing the temperature at the inlet, as shown in Fig. 6c. With the temperature increased from 1973 K to 2173 K, the center of the solid–liquid interface has skewed to the side of the inlet. Nevertheless, in Fig. 6d, morphology of the solid–liquid interface on the other side is slightly affected, due to the damping of the heat and moment energy with distance. To modify the morphology of the solid–liquid interface on the opposite site of the inlet, an effective way recommended by the numerical results is to manipulate temperature on the mold surface, as presented in Fig. 6e. With increasing temperature of the surface associated the with rising inlet temperature, a steep V-shaped solid– liquid interface developed from both sides has been created, as illustrated in Fig. 6f. It is worth mentioning that, compared to the rising temperature at the inlet, increasing temperature on the mold surface is a more energy-consuming technique. The reason is that the beam scanning area is much smaller at the overflow port than at the mold surface. In addition, the temperature rising on the surface of the mold will aggravate evaporation, which challenges the melt flow with a difficult problem for component homogenization. Melt Flow Evolution During EBCHM Process The melt flow in the mold has the responsibility of homogenizing the component to restrain the element segregation induced by evaporation. Since none of the stirring techniques has been applied during the EBCHM process, the melt flow evolution mainly depends on the inlet flow and convection inside the pool. To understand the basics of flow evolution, numerical modeling was utilized to provide flow patterns for the representative pool morphologies presented in the previous section, as shown in Fig. 7. The results in Fig. 7a indicate that, for a shallow V-shaped solid–liquid interface, the development of melt flow towards the casting direction was limited due to the blocking of the solid part. The flow has to diffuse on the surface with a fast-growing velocity. However, the moment energy of the flow has been exhausted in the middle of the pool, which is thus unable to homogenize the component at the distal end, as shown in Fig. 7b. In a modified solid–liquid interface illustrated in Fig. 7c and d, the melt flow shows an obvious improvement, as the flow below molten surface has also developed. This should contribute to a flat 2940 Gao, Huang, Y. Zhang, H. Zhang, Shi, Jiang, and Zhou Fig. 6. Solid-liquid interface evolution of d = 260 mm TC4 round ingot (a) with varying inlet velocity, (b) presents with 3D morphology at steady state for picked case of inlet velocity variation, (c) with varying inlet temperature, (d) presents with 3D morphology at steady state for picked case of inlet temperature variation, (e) with synchronously variated inlet and surface temperature, and (f) presents with 3D morphology at steady state for picked case of synchronously variated inlet and surface temperature. solid–liquid interface near the inlet, which allows the melt to flow towards the casting direction. Nevertheless, parts of the melt in the molten pool are still not involved in the flow without stirring, which may provide the opportunity for element segregation. Numerical Modeling of EBCHM for Large-Scale TC4 Alloy Round Ingots 2941 Fig. 7. Melt-flow evolution of d = 260 mm TC4 round ingot (a) on the vertical section in a shallow ‘‘V’’ shape molten pool, (b) presents in 3D with a shallow ‘‘V’’ shape molten pool, (c) on the vertical section in a modified ‘‘V’’ shape molten pool, (d) presents in 3D with a modified ‘‘V’’ shape molten pool, (e) on the vertical section in a ‘‘V’’ shape molten pool which is partial to inlet, and (f) presents in 3D with a ‘‘V’’ shape molten pool which is partial to inlet. To create stirring in the pool, a considerable pool depth near the inlet is necessary. With enough development in the casting direction, as illustrated in Fig. 7e, the flow will begin to stir, as shown in Fig. 7f, which is welcomed since the enhanced convection will benefit component homogenization as well as the formation of dendrite structures. CONCLUSION An approximating electron beam pattern designed for realistic EBCHM process has been tested by a CFD model. With selected pulse duration and beam-frequency, namely 0.1 ms and 5 Hz, the pattern has shown an ability to maintain the temperature on the molten surface with a gentle temperature gradient. CFD calculations were also used to predict the evolution of the solid–liquid interface and melt flow during EBCHM. The recommended pool morphology was created when the inlet flow velocity was 0.0295 m/s at 2173 K, and the temperature of the molten surface was maintained at 1973 K. In those conditions, the stirring inside the molten pool has been strengthened, which may benefit composition homogenization. 2942 Gao, Huang, Y. Zhang, H. Zhang, Shi, Jiang, and Zhou ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The authors are grateful for the financial support of the National Key R&D Program of China (2016YFB0301200). In addition, the comments from Dr. Xiangming Li are gratefully acknowledged. REFERENCES 1. X. Zhao, C. Reilly, L. Yao, D.M. Maijer, S.L. Cockcroft, and J. Zhu, Appl. Math. Model. 38, 3607 (2014). 2. H.R. Harker, Vacuum 41, 2154 (1990). 3. A. Mitchell, Mater. Sci. Eng. A 263, 217 (1999). 4. J.R. Wood, JOM 54, 56 (2002). 5. R.E. Shuster, Modeling of Aluminum Evaporation During Electron Beam Cold Hearth Melting of Titanium Alloy Ingots, Masters thesis, The University of British Columbia (2013). 6. J.P. Bellot, D. Ablitzer, and E. Hess, Metal. Mater. Trans. B 31, 845 (2000). 7. S.V. Akhonin, N.P. Trigub, V.N. Zamkov, and S.L. Semiatin, Metal. Mater. Trans. B 34, 447 (2003). 8. A. Powell, J. Wan den Avyle, B. Damkroger, J. Szekely, and U. Pal, Metal. Mater. Trans. B 28, 1227 (1997). 9. Q. Liu, X. Li, and Y. Jiang, Vacuum 141, 1 (2017). 10. Q. Liu, X. Li, and Y. Jiang, J. Mater. Res. 32, 1 (2017). 11. R. Shuster, C. Reilly, D.M. Maijer, and S.L. Cockcroft, IOP Conf. Ser. Mater. Sci. Eng. 33, 1 (2012). 12. ANSYS Inc. ANSYS Fluent Theory Guide (Release 15.0, 2013). http://www.ansys.com. Accessed Nov 2013. 13. Z. Zhang, Modeling of Al Evaporation and Marangoni Flow in Electron Beam Button Melting of Ti-6Al-4V, Masters thesis, The University of British Columbia (2013). 14. K. Vutova, E. Koleva, and G. Mladenov, Int. Rev. Mech. Eng. 5, 257 (2009). 15. E. Koleva, K. Vutova, and G. Mladenov, Vacuum 62, 189 (2001).