Optics & Laser Technology 179 (2024) 111365 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Optics and Laser Technology journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/optlastec Full length article Study on the thermal behavior and microstructure of Fe-based deposited layers prepared by laser cladding on Al substrate Keyan Wang a , Xianqing Yin a, * , Chengxin Li a , Kaiping Du b , Miriayi Halifu a a b State Key Laboratory for Mechanical Behavior of Materials, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, Shaanxi 710049, China BGRIMM Technology Group, Beijing 100160, China A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T Keywords: Laser cladding Particle flow Temperature measurement Temperature gradient Microstructure Martensite steel This research paper primarily explores the thermal behavior and microstructure of Fe-based deposit layers prepared via laser cladding on an Al substrate. Initially, the study quantitatively measured the temperature changes in the powder flow and the cladded layer using a monochromatic temperature measurement method and delved into the relationships between powder pre-melting behavior, cladding velocity, and the evolution of the cladded layer’s microstructure. Subsequently, Fe-Cr-Ni-B-Si martensitic stainless steel powder was chosen to clad the Al substrate. Intensive analysis of the experimental results generated a comprehensive understanding of the impacts that conditions such as the laser focal plane location and cladding speed have on layer formation. Finally, the paper investigated the influences of laser focal plane location and cladding speed on the charac­ teristics of the laser clad layer, providing profound insight into the effects of increased cladding speed on reducing clad layer thickness and structural changes. The conclusions drawn from this research study are highly beneficial to better comprehend applications of laser cladding in domains such as manufacturing and layer preparation. 1. Introduction Laser cladding technology is a type of laser processing method, widely applied in areas like additive manufacturing and coating prep­ aration [1]. In recent years, Fraunhofer proposed high-speed laser cladding technology featuring pre-melting of the powder, which improved the efficiency of laser cladding and expanded its usage [2]. Because laser energy primarily effects powder particles, materials with high laser reflectivity, such as aluminum alloys, can also undergo sur­ face laser cladding [3]. Thanks to the preparation of wear-resistant and corrosion-resistant coatings on the aluminum alloy surface, aluminum alloy can be used in high-wear and corrosive environments [4]. In terms of experimental measurements, the evolution of powder and melt pool is a dynamic process that cannot be measured with contact temperature measurement methods, such as thermocouples. Therefore, non-contact temperature measurement methods are often used to monitor the thermal process of laser cladding. Arrizubieta et al. [5] used a two-color pyrometer to measure the temperatures reached in the melt pool. Gulyaev et al. [6] obtained the temperature field of powder beam flow in lateral injector powder-feed laser cladding based on the spectral- brightness pyrometry method, but did not further discuss the tempera­ ture evolution of individual particles. Controlling the temperature of the powder particles after they leave the nozzle under laser irradiation is conducive to controlling the formation and performance of the coating. Before approaching the substrate, the powder particles will be heated by the laser beam to a certain temperature. If the temperature of the powder particles is too low or high, it will affect the quality of the cladding. If the temperature of the powder particles is lower than the temperature of the solid particles, they will be in a solid state and cannot merge with each other. Moreover, a low powder temperature reduces the temperature of the substrate melt pool and is not conducive to the deposition of the coating. If the temperature of the powder particles is significantly higher than the temperature of the liquid phase line, it will input additional heat into the base, enlarge the heat-affected zone of the base, and increase the dilution rate of the cladding layer [7]. Some numerical models have studied the temperature evolution of powder particles. Lin [8] studied the temperature of a single particle with a simplified one-dimensional model and measured the average tempera­ ture of the powder flow along the beam axis. Kovalev [9] provided a three-dimensional computational model of the powder particles based * Corresponding author. E-mail addresses: wangkeyantc@stu.xjtu.edu.cn (K. Wang), xqyin@mail.xjtu.edu.cn (X. Yin), licx@mail.xjtu.edu.cn (C. Li), dukaiping@bgrimm.com (K. Du), mihrayhlf@stu.xjtu.edu.cn (M. Halifu). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.optlastec.2024.111365 Received 2 October 2022; Received in revised form 10 June 2024; Accepted 21 June 2024 Available online 5 July 2024 0030-3992/© 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. K. Wang et al. Optics and Laser Technology 179 (2024) 111365 2. Experimental procedure 2.1. Material specification The Fe-Cr-Ni-B-Si martensite stainless steel powder (Commercial brand: JG-3, provided by BGRIMM Technology Group) is applied to form the cladding layer onto pure aluminum substrate. The particles from this powder, aimed to form the cladding layer, have a size range of less than 53 μm, which is illustrated in Fig. 1. The element compositions of the JG-3 powder are shown in Table 1. Fig. 2 shows the equilibrium phase diagram and continuous cooling transformation (CCT) diagram from the J-Mat Pro database. The solidus temperature of JG-3 is 1484.49 K, and the liquidus temperature is 1648.15 K, as shown in Fig. 2(a). Because of the fast cooling rate during the laser cladding process, which is faster than 2.06 × 103 K s− 1, the phase of the JG-3 cladding layer at room temperature is mainly martensite, as shown in Fig. 2(b). Fig. 1. SEM of powder particles. on this and obtained the temperature evolution of the powder particles in the axial direction, revealing a correlation between the temperature of the powder particles and their paths. However, due to reasons such as small powder particles and fast-moving speed, experimental measure­ ments of the temperature evolution process for individual particles are still lacking. This is very important for the pre-melting phenomenon of laser cladding and temperature evolution of the cladding layer. The metallurgical behavior of the melt pool is another concern during laser cladding [10]. Metallurgical behavior involves the tem­ perature gradient G of the cladding layer and the solidification rate R, which further affects the microstructure, component distribution, and mechanical properties of the cladding layer [11]. There are a lot of simulations related to cladding. Liu et al. [12] used a node activation numerical model to simulate the formation process of the coating and revealed the temperature field changes and cladding layer formation under laser cladding work parameters. Song et al. [13] used a metal laser direct deposition numerical model they developed to analyze the con­ vection morphology inside the melt pool. They found that the temper­ ature gradient is the decisive factor leading to the formation of the solidified structure, explaining the columnar-to-equiaxed transition phenomenon that occurs in the melt pool from the bottom to the top. Simulation results can qualitatively describe the temperature evolution of the melt pool and the formation of the organization, but there are still a lack of related experimental results. This may be due to the fast speed of laser cladding, the small size of the melt pool, and interference from powder particles during observation which makes it difficult to capture the characteristics of the melt pool. Therefore, most experiments focus more on the observation of the shape of the melt pool and less on tem­ perature evolution reports [14]. Our research intends to illumine the deficit in our understanding of the temperature evolution during laser cladding. Employing a mono­ chrome temperature measurement method, we aim to quantitatively measure the temperature changes of the powder flow and the cladding layer. We seek to elucidate both the behavior of powder pre-melting and the relationship between cladding speed and microstructure evolution of the cladded layer. Our findings promise to enhance the understanding of the strengthening mechanism of the cladding layer, casting light on customizable microstructures. 2.2. Experiment 2.2.1. Principle and calibration of single-color pyrometry As the evolution of powder and molten pool is a dynamic process, it cannot be measured with contact temperature measurement methods, such as thermocouples. Therefore, non-contact temperature measure­ ment methods are often used to monitor the thermal process of laser cladding. Any object at a temperature above absolute zero radiates en­ ergy outward in the form of electromagnetic waves of a certain wave­ length. Non-contact temperature measurement methods are based on the principle that an object’s radiative energy changes with its tem­ perature. However, current non-contact temperature measuring in­ struments have varying degrees of limitations when capturing the temperature evolution of powder-molten pool during the laser cladding process. Radiation thermometers and infrared thermal imaging devices cannot accurately locate the measurement position and are easily interfered with by plasma; colorimetric thermometers can shield the interference of plasma, but have limitations on the spatial and temporal resolution of the measurement area. To achieve high-resolution mea­ surement of the temperature of high-speed moving powder and rapidly solidifying molten pools, we use a single-color pyrometry method with a black and white high-speed camera, in combination with a telephoto lens and a narrow-band filter. This method which is widely used for its simplicity [15]. It can capture the infrared radiation of powder particles and molten pools in the range of 784.5 ± 10 nm with an extremely high resolution and sampling rate through macro photography, and obtain information about the temperature evolution. A black and white highspeed camera can collect radiation information in the range of 350–1100 nm with extremely high resolution and sampling rate. The telephoto lens can achieve macro photography, magnifying the powder particles and the molten pool to a distinguishable degree. The narrowband filter can filter out visible light, plasma thermal radiation. The temperature measurement principle of the single-color pyrometry method is explained as follows. As shown in Fig. 3(a), according to the distribution law of blackbody radiation energy, namely, Planck’s radiation law, the radiation emit­ tance is related to temperature at the same wavelength: Mb (λ, T) = 2πℏc2 1 ⋅ λ5 eℏc/λkT − 1 (1) In Eq. (1), λ is the electromagnetic wavelength radiated by the object, Table 1 Compositions of JG-3 powder (wt%). Brand Element Ni Cr Cu Zn Si C B Mn Mg Al Fe JG-3 1.0 16.0 − − 1.0 0.2 1.0 − − − Bal. 2 K. Wang et al. Optics and Laser Technology 179 (2024) 111365 Fig. 2. Phase transformation of JG-3: (a) equilibrium phase diagram and (b) CCT diagram. and T is the temperature of the blackbody. Mb (λ, T) is the radiation emittance in W⋅m− 2⋅μm− 1; ℏ is the Planck constant (6.63 × 10− 34 J s); c is the speed of light (2.998 × 108 m⋅s− 1); and k is the Boltzmann constant (1.38 × 10− 23N m k− 1). If the emissivity ε(λ, T) of an object is known, the temperature can be obtained from the radiation emittance. Single-color pyrometry can measure the surface temperature of an object by measuring the radiation energy in a narrow wavelength range [λ0 − Δλ, λ0 + Δλ]. If the wavelength range of the narrow-band filter covers the characteristic radiation wavelengths of Ar I and Ar II, the measurement results will be inaccurate. If the band is too narrow, the energy received by the detector will be too small to reach the response threshold. In the measurement process, the characteristics of the camera also affect the measurement accuracy. Therefore, choosing an appro­ priate wavelength bandwidth is helpful to suppress the influence of the radiation of the environmental radiator on the temperature measure­ ment accuracy. Fig. 3(b) shows the spectral response curve of the phantom VEO 1310 high-speed camera. When the incident wavelength exceeds 760 nm, only the black-and-white photosensitive channel works, which can eliminate the interference of blue, green and red photosensitive channels. However, when the wavelength exceeds 800 nm, the product of the quantum efficiency QE and the filter factor FF of the CCD, that is, the parameter QE ⋅ FF, is less than 50 %, which reduces the radiation energy received by the CCD and reduces the temperature measurement range. Second, the plasma of the protection gas will affect the temperature measurement accuracy. In Fig. 3(b), the strong peaks of Ar I in the wavelength range of 760–800 nm are 763.5106, 772.3761, 772.4207 and 794.8176 nm [6]. Therefore, a narrow-band filter with a central wavelength of 784.5 nm and a half bandwidth of 10 nm is selected, which can not only ensure the sensitivity of measuring the radiation energy but also avoid the error caused by the radiation energy of Ar plasma. The relationship between temperature and grayscale in the wave­ length range of 784.5 ± 10 nm is calibrated. Under the experimental conditions of this study, the narrow-band filter was used to collect and analyze the radiation energy of JG-3 martensitic stainless steel at high temperature. To simplify the calibration process, martensitic stainless steel can be regarded as a gray body, and the emissivity ε is a constant. The preconditions for this assumption are as follows: (1) the selected measurement wavelength range is narrow, and the influence of wave­ length on emissivity can be ignored; (2) The temperature dependence of the emissivity is negligible [16]. The voltage value of each channel of the photosensitive element of the high-speed camera is directly proportional to the number of photons received at the corresponding frequency per unit time. Therefore, there is a relationship between the gray value of the photo pixel filtered by the narrow-band filter and the radiation energy: G(λ, T) = AÂ⋅(QEÂ⋅FF)Â⋅M(λ, T) (2) In Eq. (2), G(λ, T) is the pixel gray level, and the range is [0, 255]. The parameter A to be measured is a constant, with the unit of (W⋅m− 2⋅Sr3 K. Wang et al. Optics and Laser Technology 179 (2024) 111365 Fig. 3. Principle and calibration of single-color pyrometry, (a) Planck’s radiation law, (b) spectral response curve and the strong peaks of Ar I and Ar II, (c) cali­ bration experiment, (d) the relationship between grayscale value and temperature. Table 2 Powder feeding parameters. Powder carrier gas pressure /MPa 0.1 G(λ, T) = AÂ⋅(QEÂ⋅FF)Â⋅ ∫ λ0 +Δλ εÂ⋅2πhc2 λ0 − Δλ λ5 1 ⋅ hc/kλT dλ − 1 e (3) Powder carrier gas flow rate /L⋅min− 1 Powder feeding rate /g⋅min− 1 Shielding gas pressure /MPa Shielding gas flow rate /m3⋅h− 1 Laser power /kW Eq. (4) can be obtained by substituting x = hc/kλT, λ0 = 784.5nm and Δλ = 10 nm into Eq. (3): 8.0 28.8 0.2 1.0 2.0 π k4 G(T) = εAʹ 3 2 T4 Â⋅ h c 1 ⋅m− 1)-1, which represents the linear relationship between the pixel gray level and the radiation energy. The relationship between the pixel gray value and temperature of a high-temperature object can be determined by integrating M(λ, T) in interval [λ0 − Δλ, λ0 + Δλ], and Eq. (3) was obtained: ∫ 18562 T 18095 T x3 dx ex − 1 (4) In Eq. (4), Aʹ = AÂ⋅(QEÂ⋅FF). Next, as shown in Fig. 3(c), the un­ known coefficient εAʹ is determined experimentally. The compact bulk material sintered with JG-3 powder was irradiated by a 1064 nm laser beam at a single point on its surface. The relationship between the melting point of JG-3 martensitic steel and the grayscale with a 784.5 ± 10 nm filter was tested. When the measured temperature of the JG-3 Fig. 4. Schematic diagram of powder flow temperature measurement. 4 K. Wang et al. Optics and Laser Technology 179 (2024) 111365 Fig. 5. Schematic diagram of the temperature measurement in the laser cladding process. study the thermal process and microstructure evolution of the cladding layer. The cladding parameters are shown in Table 3. The waist position of the powder flow remains 2 mm higher than that of the substrate, and the laser focus is adjusted at z = 19 mm and z = 23 mm. The Al substrate moves at a uniform speed (vs) under the moving platform driven by the stepping motor. The high-speed camera is placed at an angle of 30◦ to the horizontal line, and the top of the cladding layer can be photo­ graphed. The obtained gray image adopts the single-color pyrometry described in Fig. 3(d) to calculate the temperature distribution of the thermal process of the cladding layer. Table 3 Experimental parameters of single pass cladding. No. Position of laser focal plane/mm Cladding speed vs/m⋅min− 1 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 19 0.32 0.56 1.00 1.78 0.32 0.56 1.00 1.78 23 2.2.3. Microstructure and microhardness test The metallographic samples of the cross section of the cladding layer were prepared. Then, they were polished with sandpaper until 2000#, and aqua regia (HNO3: HCl = 1:3) was used to corrode them until the microstructure of the cladding layer was clearly visible. The micro­ structure was observed by a Nikon inverted metallographic microscope and SEM of a Tescan mira3, and the element content and distribution of the cladding layer and substrate were measured by EDS. We measured and statistically analyzed the dendrite size near the surface of the cladding layer using Image-Pro software, using the diameter of the equivalent area circle as the dendrites size, as shown in Fig. 6. The values of 100 measurement points were collected from each sample, and the average value was taken as the dendrites size of the sample. block reaches 1484.49 K of JG-3 solidus, as shown in Fig. 2(a), the corresponding gray value is 42.5. The measured results are substituted into equation (4) to obtain the unknown coefficient εAʹ = 7.74 × 10− 1 mÂ⋅sÂ⋅N− 1 , and the relationship curve between the gray level and temperature under the current experimental conditions can be obtained. As shown in Fig. 3(d), the measurable temperature range for JG-3 martensitic stainless steel is 1415–1735 K. It should be noted that the background gray level has been deducted, that is, GB = 23. 2.2.2. Analysis of the powder flow and deposition process The powder flow at the coaxial powder feeding nozzle is photo­ graphed by a uniform white light backlight and phantom VEO 1310 high-speed camera. The powder feeding parameters are shown in Table 2. The effects of the laser focal plane position and powder feeding rate on the powder particle temperature were studied. As shown in Fig. 4, by adjusting the position of the laser focal plane, the z-direction position of the laser focus relative to the substrate is changed to realize the adjustment of positive and negative defocus. When the laser focus is adjusted at z = 19 mm, z = 21 mm and z = 23 mm, the change in powder particle temperature in the z-direction is measured by single-color pyrometry. The single pass cladding experiment shown in Fig. 5 is designed to 3. Experimental results and discussion 3.1. Temperature evolution of particles According to the experiment of powder particles, the optimized powder feeding parameters are determined to test the temperature of powder flow. The powder feeding rate was 28.8 g⋅min− 1, and the carrier gas flow was 6 L min− 1. Under this parameter, the velocity of powder particles is low, which can be irradiated by laser more fully, and the density of powder flow is higher to improve the ratio of laser energy 5 K. Wang et al. Optics and Laser Technology 179 (2024) 111365 Fig. 6. Schematic diagram for measuring dendrites size. Fig. 7. Measurement of the powder particle temperature: (a) laser focal plane at z = 19 mm, (b) laser focal plane at z = 21 mm, (c) laser focal plane at z = 23 mm, and (d) average value of maximum temperature of powder particles. 6 K. Wang et al. Optics and Laser Technology 179 (2024) 111365 Fig. 8. Fusion of the powder particles: (a) t = 0 μs, (b) t = 266.67 μs, (c) t = 466.67 μs, (d) t = 666.67 μs, (e) t = 866.67 μs, (f) t = 1200.00 μs. acting on powder flow. Fig. 7 shows the evolution of the powder temperature along the z direction of the nozzle axis. The numbering indicates the order in which the powder particles appear. The yellow dashed line in Fig. 7 represents the laser focus plane, which is the position with the highest laser energy. Therefore, the powder particles that reach this position can be heated more thoroughly. As shown in Fig. 7(a), the laser focal plane is located at z = 19 mm. When the powder particles move to the focal plane, most of the powder particles melt and enter the solid–liquid phase zone, which is in a mush zone, and No. 5 powder particle have not yet melted. Then, the temperature of the powder particles continued to rise. Except for the No. 5, 6 and 7 powder particles, the temperature of the other powder par­ ticles was higher than the liquid temperature, and the temperature tended to be stable and gradually reached thermal equilibrium. As shown in Fig. 7(b), the laser focal plane is located at z = 21 mm. When the powder particles move to the laser focal plane, the temperatures of the No. 9, 12, 15-A and 15-B powder particles exceed the solid tem­ perature and are in the mush zone. The temperatures of the other powder particles are lower than the solid temperature and have not melted. Subsequently, the temperature of the powder particles continued to rise. Except for the temperature of the No. 9 and 12 powder particles, which was temporarily higher than the liquid phase temper­ ature, the other powder particles were not completely melted. As shown in Fig. 7(c), the laser focal plane is located at z = 23 mm. The powder particle temperature does not exceed the liquid phase temperature, and the powder temperature begins to decrease immediately after reaching the peak value, which shows a short high-temperature duration. The earlier the powder particles enter the laser focus plane, the longer the high-temperature duration. Wang et al. reported that the laser absorptivity of liquid metal materials is greater than that of solid ma­ terials [17]. When the laser focal plane is close to the nozzle (z = 19 mm, z = 21 mm), the powder particles enter the high laser energy density area earlier and are quickly heated to the melting point and melted. The powder particles in the liquid phase can be continuously irradiated and heated by laser irradiation. Due to convective heat transfer and thermal radiation, the powder particles reach a thermal equilibrium state so that they can maintain a temperature state above the melting point within a long distance after leaving the nozzle. When the laser focus is far away from the nozzle (z = 23 mm), the amount of powder entering the laser focus plane is less due to the divergence of powder flow. Only a small part of the powder particles can be continuously heated by the laser, and powder particles with lower temperatures will form sticky powder on the formed cladding layer. After the powder particles leave the laser irradiation area, the temperature of the powder particles drops rapidly due to convective heat transfer and thermal radiation. As shown in Fig. 7 (d), the average value of the maximum temperature of multiple powder particles at different laser focal plane positions is calculated. As the laser focal plane moves down, the average value of the maximum temperature of powder particles decreases. Therefore, the strategy of moving the focal plane up can effectively melt the powder particles, prolong the high-temperature residence time of the powder particles, and realize the powder premelting effect of the laser cladding process. The No. 2 and 15 powder particles fused together at z = 20.8 mm and z = 23.4 mm, respectively. Before fusion, the temperature of the No. 2-A powder particle is lower than that of 2-B. After fusion, the temperature of the No. 2 powder particle is between No. 2-A and 2-B, and the tem­ perature gradually increases under continuous laser irradiation. The temperature changes of the No. 15-A and 15-B powder particles are basically the same, and there is no obvious temperature fluctuation after fusion. Fig. 8 shows the temperature images before and after the fusion of the No. 2-A and 2-B powder particles. The observable times of the No. 2A powder particle and No. 2-B powder particle are t = 0 μs and t = 266.67 μs, respectively. Because the velocity of No. 2-B powder particles is slower than that of No. 2-A powder particles, the distance between the two powders gradually approaches. At the moment before fusion, that is, t = 666.67 μs, the temperature of No. 2-A powder particles is 1610 K and that of No. 2-B powder particles is 1578 K. At the next moment, when t = 866.67 μs, the two powder particles are completely fused. The tem­ perature of the 2 powder particles after fusion is 1598 K, which is be­ tween the temperatures of the two powder particles before fusion. Then, under continuous irradiation with laser energy, the temperature of the No. 2 powder particles continued to rise, reaching 1632 K at t = 1200.00 μs. Wolff et al. found that the melting state of the particles affects the 7 K. Wang et al. Optics and Laser Technology 179 (2024) 111365 Fig. 9. The frequency histogram diagram and cumulative curve of powder particles temperature at different laser focal plane positions, (a) z = 19 mm, (b) z = 23 mm. Fig. 10. Temperature evolution of powder particles: (a) schematic diagram of the position of laser focus relative to the trajectory of powder particles; (b) simulation and experimental results of temperature evolution of powder particles. 8 K. Wang et al. Optics and Laser Technology 179 (2024) 111365 Fig. 11. Photographs of the deposition process of the cladding layer: (a)-(d) laser focal plane at z = 19 mm, (e)-(h) laser focal plane at z = 23 mm, (a) and (e) vs = 0.32 m⋅min− 1, (b) and (f) vs = 0.56 m⋅min− 1, (c) and (g) vs = 1.00 m⋅min− 1, and (d) and (h) vs = 1.78 m⋅min− 1. motion after coalescing [14]. In this case, the temperatures of the con­ tacting particles are both higher than the liquid line, which will not create a rotational propelling motion. The fusion of the powder particles is beneficial to balancing the temperature of the powder particles. Fig. 9 is a frequency histogram of powder particle temperature dis­ tribution at different laser focal plane positions. When z = 19 mm, the temperature distribution of powder particles is mainly in the range of 1400 K-1680 K, and the temperature distribution of powder particles is relatively uniform, but the temperature of powder particles is relatively low in the range of 1520 K-1680 K. This may be a systematic error caused by insufficient number of powder particles counted. The tem­ perature range with the highest frequency is 1600 K-1620 K. When z = 23 mm, the temperature distribution of powder particles is mainly be­ tween 1380 K and 1620 K. And the temperature range with the highest frequency is 1440 K-1460 K. Statistics show that when z = 19 mm, the percentage of powder particle temperature lower than the solidus tem­ perature is 32.9 %, while when z = 23 mm, the percentage of powder particle temperature lower than the solidus temperature is 74.5 %. For the experimental group with more fully melted powder particles, the thicker the cladding layer is. The statistical results show that the method of moving the laser focal plane upward makes the powder particles melt completely before entering the matrix molten pool, and achieves the powder pre melting effect in the laser cladding process. Higher powder particle temperatures will increase the temperature of the melt pool. At the same time, a higher powder temperature will lead to a steeper temperature curve and a larger temperature gradient near the solid­ –liquid interface of the cladding layer. Regarding the observed leftward shift of the curves, it can be attributed to the insufficient heating of powder particles, which results in a higher proportion of particles hav­ ing lower temperatures. Consequently, this leads to a shift of the cu­ mulative curves towards lower temperature ranges, effectively causing the said leftward shift. 3.2. Simulation of thermal process To gain further insights into the temperature changes of powder particles, we have conducted numerical simulation experiments. Please refer to the Supplementary Material for specific details regarding the simulation. Ideally, after leaving the nozzle, the powder particles will move along a straight line and continue to be heated by laser irradiation. According to the law of conservation of energy: Φl = Up + Φout (5) where Φl is the total heat flow of laser radiation acting on powder particles; Up is the increment of internal energy of powder particles; and Φout is the heat flow out of the powder particles. According to Fourier’s law, the total heat flow of laser radiation acting on powder particles is: Φl = q(z)Δt (6) where q(z) is the laser power density, and its distribution is shown in Fig. 10(a); Δt is the time when the laser acts on the powder particles. When the latent heat is not considered, the internal energy increment of powder particles is related to the temperature increment. For a single powder particle with mass m, the internal energy increment can be expressed as: Up = mCΔTp (7) Considering the radiation of the deposited layer material and the convection heat exchange with the outside world, the boundary condi­ tions of powder particles flowing can be expressed as [18]: ) ( (8) Φout = hA Tp − TAr + εAσTp 4 where h is the convective heat transfer coefficient, A is the surface area of powder particles, TAr is the temperature of the Ar gas flow, and ε is the emissivity of powder particles. Therefore, the change in the temperature 9 K. Wang et al. Optics and Laser Technology 179 (2024) 111365 Fig. 12. Temperature and temperature gradient measurement results: (a) and (b) with laser focal plane at z = 19 mm, (c) and (h) with laser focal plane at z = 23 mm; (a) and (c) are the temperature changes in the x direction, and (b) and (d) are temperature gradient changes in the x direction. of the powder particles and laser action time can be expressed as: ) ( q(z)Δt = mCΔTp + hA Tp − TAr + εAσ Tp 4 3.3. Solidification of the cladding layers (9) Fig. 11 shows the temperature measurement results of the cladding layer obtained based on the single-color temperature measurement method, and the red dotted line is the mush zone. At the same cladding speed, when the laser focal plane position is at z = 19 mm, there are more molten powder particles above the molten pool, as shown in Fig. 9. And the size of the molten pool is larger when the focal plane is at z = 19 mm. When the cladding speed of the substrate is 1.78 m min− 1, the cladding layer is almost not formed in the experimental group with the laser focal plane at z = 23 mm, while the cladding layer is formed when the laser focus position z = 19 mm. The powder particles have passed the laser focal plane before entering the substrate molten pool and have been fully melted to avoid the problem that the cladding layer cannot be deposited due to the nonmelting of the substrate, as indicated by the arrow in Fig. 11(c). Therefore, powder premelting can significantly improve the cladding efficiency of the iron-based cladding layer on the surface of the aluminum alloy. Based on the single-color pyrometry, the temperature at the mark lines 1 to 7 shown in Fig. 11 on the upper surface of the cladding layer and its temperature gradient in the x direction are obtained. The tem­ perature and temperature gradient of the marked line are shown in Fig. 12. The arrow on the left of each curve indicates that the temper­ ature is in the liquidus, and the arrow on the right indicates that the temperature is in the solidus. As shown in Fig. 12(a) and (b), when the substrate velocity increases from 0.32 m⋅min− 1 to 1.78 m⋅min− 1, the temperature gradient at the In this experiment, the distribution of the heat source is shown in Fig. 10(a), and the laser power density at the focus is approximately 2.54 × 105 W⋅cm− 2. Nakamura et al. reported that the interaction be­ tween the laser and powder particles is mainly thermal conductivity [19]. The defocus amount affects the laser energy density of the powder particle trajectory. After leaving the nozzle and entering the laser beam irradiation, the powder particles are continuously irradiated by laser energy. The earlier the powder particles enter the laser region with high energy density, the faster the temperature rises, and it is easier to obtain a higher temperature. Fig. 10(b) verifies this conclusion based on experimental and nu­ merical simulation methods. Compared with the powder particles entering the laser focus later (z = 21 mm and z = 23 mm), the earlier the powder particles enter the laser focus position (z = 19 mm), the higher the maximum temperature of the powder. After the powder leaves the focus, the laser energy density will gradually decrease, and the heating rate of powder particles will also decrease. When the energy input and output of powder particles are basically equal, that is, mCΔTp = ( ) hA Tp − TAr + εAσTp 4 , the temperature of powder particles will remain constant for a while. The longer the length of the constant temperature section is, the smaller the influence of the working distance fluctuation on the cladding effect. 10 K. Wang et al. Optics and Laser Technology 179 (2024) 111365 Fig. 13. Section composition distribution of the cladding layer, (a) vs = 0.32 m⋅min− 1, (b) vs = 0.56 m⋅min− 1, (c) vs = 1.00 m⋅min− 1, (d) vs = 1.78 m⋅min− 1, (e) content distribution of Fe and (f) content distribution of Al. liquidus changes from − 8.06 × 105 K⋅m− 1 to − 2.23 × 106 K⋅m− 1. The temperature gradient at the solidus varies from − 3.49 × 105 K⋅m− 1 to − 1.15 × 106 K⋅m− 1. And in Fig. 12(c) and (d), when the substrate ve­ locity increases from 0.32 m⋅min− 1 to 1.00 m⋅min− 1, the temperature gradient at the liquidus changes from − 1.49 × 106 K⋅m− 1 to − 2.18 × 106 K⋅m− 1. The temperature gradient at the solidus varies from − 4.98 × 105 K⋅m− 1 to − 9.98 × 105 K⋅m− 1. The higher the cladding speed is, the thinner the cladding layer, and the cooling effect of the substrate on the cladding layer becomes stronger. Therefore, with increasing cladding speed, the absolute value of the temperature gradient at the boundary of the molten pool increases significantly. 11 K. Wang et al. Optics and Laser Technology 179 (2024) 111365 Fig. 14. Cross-section (a-d) and longitudinal (e-h) section microstructures of the cladding layer: (a) and (e) vs = 0.32 m⋅min− 1, (b) and (f) vs = 0.56 m⋅min− 1, (c) and (g) vs = 1.00 m⋅min− 1, (d) and (h) vs = 1.78 m⋅min− 1. Fig. 15. Distribution of dendrites size, (a) vs = 0.32 m⋅min− 1, (b) vs = 0.56 m⋅min− 1, (c) vs = 1.00 m⋅min− 1, (d) vs = 1.78 m⋅min− 1. 3.4. Microstructure of the cladding layers decreases with increasing cladding speed. The main components of the cladding layer Fe and Cr and the main element Al of the substrate were analyzed by energy spectrum. The cladding layer diffuses below the substrate surface, and there is a tran­ sition zone. As shown in Fig. 13(e) and (f), the depth of the cladding layer into the substrate becomes shallower with increasing cladding The cross section of the cladding layer with laser focal plane at z = 19 mm is shown in Fig. 13(a)–(d). When the substrate velocity increases from 0.32 m⋅min− 1 to 1.78 m⋅min− 1, the thickness of the cladding layer decreases from 795 μm to 281 μm. The thickness of the cladding layer 12 K. Wang et al. Optics and Laser Technology 179 (2024) 111365 DS = 2.09 + 0.41ln(|GL | × R − 1.49 ) (10) where DS represents the average dendrites size in μm and |GL|×R is the cooling rate of the liquid interface in K s− 1. The R2 of the fitting Eq. (10) is close to 1, showing a low error. 4. Conclusion In this paper, a laser cladding method based on coaxial powder feeding was proposed. The thermal process of powder flow and cladding layer was studied. The sensitivity of the powder particle temperature evolution to the position of the laser focal plane is confirmed by singlecolor pyrometry. The premelting phenomenon of powder particles was realized by raising the laser focal plane, and a cladding layer of martensitic stainless steel was prepared on the surface of the aluminum alloy. By measuring the thermal process of the cladding layer, the cor­ relation between the substrate cladding speed and the cooling rate |GL|× R was clarified, and the quantitative relationship between the cooling rate |GL|×R and the dendrites size of the microstructure was obtained. The main conclusions of the study are as follows: Fig. 16. The relationship between the cooling rate |GL|×R of the cladding layer and the dendrites size. (1) The strategy of raising the laser focal plane effectively melted the powder particles and prolonged the high-temperature residence time of the powder particles. The fusion of powder particles will affect the temperature of fused powder particles. (2) When the amount of melted powder particles decreased, the size of the molten pool is reduced. With the increase of the cladding speed, the absolute values of temperature gradient increases at the solidification areas. (3) A martensite steel cladding layer with a maximum thickness of 795 μm can be formed on the surface of the aluminum alloy. With increasing cladding speed, the near-surface temperature gradient |GL| of the cladding layer increases, the solidification rate R in­ creases, and the cooling speed increases. (4) When the cooling rate |GL|×R is high, a finer cladding layer structure forms, and the average dendrites size has a logarithmic relationship with the cooling rate. speed. Moreover, as the cladding speed increases, the Al content in the cladding layer decreases. This can be attributed to the reduction in the heat input from the substrate, leading to a decrease in the degree of substrate melting and shallower melt depth, thus weakening the dilution effect on the cladding layer. The surface of the cladding layer experiences a relatively high cooling rate during deposition due to the diminished heat input from the substrate, which leads to a fine-grained cladding layer. Fig. 14(a)–(h) depict the microstructure of the cladding layer near the surface, as seen in cross-section and longitudinal sections. The primary characteristic of the cladding layer’s microstructure at various cladding speeds is the presence of dendrites. These dendrites present cell structures, with the dendrites appearing darker and inter-dendritic areas appearing brighter. The cladding layer’s surface exhibits equiaxed dendrites in crosssection and longitudinal sections, a result of the increased solidifica­ tion speed. Additionally, the dendrites on the cladding layer’s surface are significantly refined due to the rise in solidification speed as the cladding speed escalates. On comparing the microstructures of crosssections and longitudinal sections, one can observe that their shape and size are fundamentally identical. With increasing cladding speed, the surface dendrites size of the cladding layer decreases. As shown in Fig. 15, the dendrites size near the surface of the cladding layer is counted. This result is similar to the refinement of the martensite steel cladding layer onto the 27SiMn sub­ strate based on EHLA [20]. In this experiment, although the cladding speed of the substrate did not reach the ultra-high speed, the high thermal diffusion rate still made the cladding layer have a large tem­ perature gradient and solidification speed, forming submicron dendrites size less than 1 μm owing to the high thermal conductivity of the Al substrate. The thermal process of the molten pool of laser cladding is unstable. Due to the impact of powder particles and Marangoni convection, the temperature gradient in some areas is high, and the solidification rate is low. As shown in Fig. 15(b) and (c), some dendrites with dendrites size greater than 3 μm were formed. Fig. 16 shows the relationship between the cooling rate |GL|×R of the cladding layer and the dendrites size. |GL| represents the temperature gradient of the molten pool at the liquidus line. The solidification rate R is equal to cladding speed. With increasing cooling rate, the cooling rate of the cladding layer increases, and the average dendrites size decreases. Based on the logarithmic fitting method, the relationship between the cooling rate and the average dendrites size under the experimental conditions is obtained, and the expression is: CRediT authorship contribution statement Keyan Wang: Writing – original draft, Software, Investigation, Conceptualization. Xianqing Yin: Supervision, Methodology, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization. Chengxin Li: Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition. Kaiping Du: Resources, Funding acquisition. Miriayi Halifu: Investigation. Declaration of competing interest The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Data availability Data will be made available on request. Acknowledgements This work was supported by National Key Research and Develop­ ment Program of China under Grant No.2018YFB2002000 and National Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant No. 2022YFB4601803. 13 K. Wang et al. Optics and Laser Technology 179 (2024) 111365 Appendix A. Supplementary material laser Direct Metal Deposition (DMD) process, J. Therm. Spray Technol. 20 (3) (2010) 465–478. [10] Z. Liu, D. Zhao, P. Wang, M. Yan, C. Yang, Z. Chen, J. Lu, Z. Lu, Additive manufacturing of metals: microstructure evolution and multistage control, J. Mater. Sci. Technol. 100 (2022) 224–236. [11] F. Xiong, Z. Gan, J. Chen, Y. Lian, Evaluate the effect of melt pool convection on grain structure of IN625 in laser melting process using experimentally validated process-structure modeling, J. Mater. Process. Technol. 303 (2022) 117538. [12] Y. Liu, C. Li, X. Huang, H. Zhang, C. Li, Investigation on solidification structure and temperature field with novel processing of synchronous powder-feeding underwater laser cladding, J. Mater. Process. Technol. 296 (2021) 117166. [13] B. Song, T. Yu, X. Jiang, W. Xi, X. Lin, The relationship between convection mechanism and solidification structure of the iron-based molten pool in metal laser direct deposition, Int. J. Mech. Sci. 165 (2020) 105207. [14] S.J. Wolff, H. Wu, N. Parab, C. Zhao, K.F. Ehmann, T. Sun, J. Cao, In-situ highspeed X-ray imaging of piezo-driven directed energy deposition additive manufacturing, Sci. Rep. 9 (1) (2019) 962. [15] I.P. Gulyaev, A.V. Dolmatov, Spectral-brightness pyrometry: Radiometric measurements of non-uniform temperature distributions, Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. 116 (2018) 1016–1025. [16] H. Kobatake, H. Khosroabadi, H. Fukuyama, Normal spectral emissivity measurement of liquid iron and nickel using electromagnetic levitation in direct current magnetic field, Metall. Mater. Trans. A 43 (7) (2012) 2466–2472. [17] J. Wang, C. Weng, J. Chang, C. Hwang, The influence of temperature and surface conditions on surface absorptivity in laser surface treatment, J. Appl. Phys. 87 (7) (2000) 3245–3253. [18] G. Meng, Y. Gong, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, H. Xie, J. Zhao, Multi-scale simulation of microstructure evolution during direct laser deposition of Inconel 718, Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. 191 (2022). [19] S. Nakamura, M. Sakurai, K. Kamimuki, T. Inoue, Y. Ito, Detection technique for transition between deep penetration mode and shallow penetration mode in CO2 laser welding of metals, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 33 (22) (2000) 2941–2948. [20] F. Shen, W. Tao, L. Li, Y. Zhou, W. Wang, S. Wang, Effect of microstructure on the corrosion resistance of coatings by extreme high speed laser cladding, Appl. Surf. Sci. 517 (2020) 146085. Supplementary material to this article can be found online at https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.optlastec.2024.111365. References [1] L. Zhu, P. Xue, Q. Lan, G. Meng, Y. Ren, Z. Yang, P. Xu, Z. Liu, Recent research and development status of laser cladding: a review, Opt. Laser Technol. 138 (2021) 106915. [2] T. Schopphoven, A. Gasser, K. Wissenbach, R. Poprawe, Investigations on ultrahigh-speed laser material deposition as alternative for hard chrome plating and thermal spraying, J. Laser Appl. 28 (2) (2016) 022501. [3] J. Li, Z. Liu, H. Ning, H. Ma, R. Xie, Y. Kong, Y. Fu, Ni-based coating on 5083 aluminum alloy with Cu-Ni interlayer fabricated by ultra-high-speed laser directed energy deposition, Surf. Coat. Technol. 474 (2023) 130068. [4] L. Dubourg, D. Ursescu, F. Hlawka, A. Cornet, Laser cladding of MMC coatings on aluminium substrate: influence of composition and microstructure on mechanical properties, Wear 258 (11–12) (2005) 1745–1754. [5] J.I. Arrizubieta, A. Lamikiz, F. Klocke, S. Martínez, K. Arntz, E. Ukar, Evaluation of the relevance of melt pool dynamics in laser material deposition process modeling, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer 115 (2017) 80–91. [6] I.P. Gulyaev, O.B. Kovalev, P.A. Pinaev, G.N. Grachev, Optical diagnostics of radiation interaction with the powder stream laterally transported during laser cladding, Opt. Lasers Eng. 126 (2020) 105877. [7] T. Schopphoven, A. Gasser, K. Wissenbach, R. Poprawe, Ultra-high-speed laser material deposition for internal surfaces, in: Y. Lu (Ed.) J. Laser Appl., Laser Institute of America, San Diego, CA USA, 2016. [8] J.M. Lin, Temperature analysis of the powder streams in coaxial laser cladding, Opt. Laser Technol. 31 (8) (1999) 565–570. [9] O.B. Kovalev, A.V. Zaitsev, D. Novichenko, I. Smurov, Theoretical and experimental investigation of gas flows, powder transport and heating in coaxial 14